Glob Chang Biol Glob Chang Biol 379 blackwellopen GCB Global Change Biology 1354-1013 1365-2486 pmc-is-collection-domain yes pmc-collection-title Wiley Open Access Collection PMC7839497 PMC7839497.1 7839497 7839497 33159828 10.1111/gcb.15443 GCB15443 1 Primary Research Article Primary Research Articles What’s hot and what’s not: Making sense of biodiversity ‘hotspots’ THOMPSON et al. Thompson Murray S. A. https://orcid.org/0000-0002-9567-175X 1 murray.thompson@cefas.co.uk Couce Elena https://orcid.org/0000-0002-3945-462X 1 Webb Thomas J. https://orcid.org/0000-0003-3183-8116 2 Grace Miriam https://orcid.org/0000-0003-2787-6996 2 Cooper Keith M. https://orcid.org/0000-0003-0625-6333 1 Schratzberger Michaela https://orcid.org/0000-0002-4973-6698 1 1 Centre for Environment, Fisheries and Aquaculture Science (CEFAS), Lowestoft Laboratory Lowestoft Suffolk UK 2 Department of Animal &amp; Plant Sciences University of Sheffield Sheffield UK * Correspondence Murray S. A. Thompson, Centre for Environment, Lowestoft Laboratory, Fisheries and Aquaculture Science (Cefas), Pakefield Road, Lowestoft, Suffolk NR33 0HT, UK. Email: murray.thompson@cefas.co.uk 26 11 2020 2 2021 27 3 373941 10.1111/gcb.v27.3 521 535 29 5 2020 01 10 2020 09 10 2020 27 01 2021 01 02 2021 01 04 2026 © 2020 Crown copyright. Global Change Biology © 2020 John Wiley &amp; Sons Ltd https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/ This is an open access article under the terms of the http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/ License, which permits use, distribution and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited. Abstract Conserving biogeographic regions with especially high biodiversity, known as biodiversity ‘hotspots’, is intuitive because finite resources can be focussed towards manageable units. Yet, biodiversity, environmental conditions and their relationship are more complex with multidimensional properties. Assessments which ignore this risk failing to detect change, identify its direction or gauge the scale of appropriate intervention. Conflicting concepts which assume assemblages as either sharply delineated communities or loosely collected species have also hampered progress in the way we assess and conserve biodiversity. We focus on the marine benthos where delineating manageable areas for conservation is an attractive prospect because it holds most marine species and constitutes the largest single ecosystem on earth by area. Using two large UK marine benthic faunal datasets, we present a spatially gridded data sampling design to account for survey effects which would otherwise be the principal drivers of diversity estimates. We then assess γ‐diversity (regional richness) with diversity partitioned between α (local richness) and β (dissimilarity), and their change in relation to covariates to test whether defining and conserving biodiversity hotspots is an effective conservation strategy in light of the prevailing forces structuring those assemblages. α‐, β‐ and γ‐diversity hotspots were largely inconsistent with each metric relating uniquely to the covariates, and loosely collected species generally prevailed with relatively few distinct assemblages. Hotspots could therefore be an unreliable means to direct conservation efforts if based on only a component part of diversity. When assessed alongside environmental gradients, α‐, β‐ and γ‐diversity provide a multidimensional but still intuitive perspective of biodiversity change that can direct conservation towards key drivers and the appropriate scale for intervention. Our study also highlights possible temporal declines in species richness over 30 years and thus the need for future integrated monitoring to reveal the causal drivers of biodiversity change. Conserving biodiversity ‘hotspots’ is intuitive because finite resources can be focussed towards manageable units. Yet, biodiversity, environmental conditions and their relationship are more complex with multidimensional properties. Assessments which ignore this risk failing to detect change, identify its direction, or gauge the scale of appropriate intervention. We focus on the marine benthos which holds most marine species and constitutes the largest single ecosystem on earth by area. When assessed alongside environmental gradients, α‐, β‐ and γ‐diversity provide a multidimensional but still intuitive perspective of biodiversity change that can direct conservation towards key drivers and the appropriate scale for intervention. Photographs used are a combination of © Elena Couce and © Crown Copyright, the latter collected by Cefas, Cornwall IFCA and Environment Agency whilst undertaking survey work in partnerships with the JNCC and Natural England. biodiversity biodiversity hotspot conservation diversity partitioning marine benthic fauna Random Forest analysis rarefaction and extrapolation species richness Centre for Environment, Fisheries and Aquaculture Science 10.13039/100012534 DP410 Natural Environment Research Council 10.13039/501100000270 NE/L003279/1 Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs MB0129 pmc-status-qastatus 0 pmc-status-live yes pmc-status-embargo no pmc-status-released yes pmc-prop-open-access yes pmc-prop-olf no pmc-prop-manuscript no pmc-prop-legally-suppressed no pmc-prop-has-pdf yes pmc-prop-has-supplement yes pmc-prop-pdf-only no pmc-prop-suppress-copyright no pmc-prop-is-real-version no pmc-prop-is-scanned-article no pmc-prop-preprint no pmc-prop-in-epmc yes pmc-license-ref CC BY source-schema-version-number 2.0 cover-date February 2021 details-of-publishers-convertor Converter:WILEY_ML3GV2_TO_JATSPMC version:5.9.6 mode:remove_FC converted:27.01.2021 Thompson MSA , Couce E , Webb TJ , Grace M , Cooper KM , Schratzberger M . What’s hot and what’s not: Making sense of biodiversity ‘hotspots’ . Glob Change Biol . 2021 ; 27 : 521 – 535 . 10.1111/gcb.15443 PMC7839497 33159828 This article is published with the permission of the Controller of HMSO and the Queen's Printer for Scotland. 1 INTRODUCTION In light of the global biodiversity crisis (Butchart et al., 2010 ; Johnson et al., 2017 ; Loh et al., 2005 ; McRae et al., 2017 ), robust information on the spatial distribution of biodiversity and anthropogenic drivers of change are critical to direct conservation efforts towards the most effective conservation interventions (Edgar et al., 2016 ; McGill et al., 2015 ; Pimm et al., 2014 ). Prioritizing ‘hotspots’ with high species richness or distinct assemblages is one of the most common strategies for biodiversity conservation (Norman &amp; White, 2019 ). Yet, there are many limitations in the way biodiversity estimates are generated because of how data are collected, collated and analysed (Cardinale et al., 2018 ; Engemann et al., 2015 ; Guilhaumon et al., 2008 ; Kupschus et al., 2016 ), which hampers biodiversity conservation (McGill et al., 2015 ; Pimm et al., 2014 ). Different views exist about how assemblages are structured. The ‘superorganism’ view predicts that strong species interactions cause sharp boundaries between unique assemblages (Clements, 1916 ). This implies that monitoring and conservation can target distinct assemblages. The ‘individualistic’ view predicts species competitiveness is conserved irrespective of composition (Gleason, 1926 ; akin to neutral theory; Hubbell, 2001 ); hence, compositional changes can be largely explained by species dispersal and responses to environmental gradients which can be both gradual and discontinuous (Liautaud et al., 2019 ). This view implies that, where there is little environmental change, stochastic processes will largely determine local assemblage structure and conservation measures can be targeted at specific pressures affecting species across their distributional range. The superorganism view is implicit in maps with hard edges between adjacent habitats and is widely applied to inform biodiversity conservation and monitoring strategies (e.g. EUNIS; Andersen et al., 2018 ; Coltman et al., 2008 ), although such classifications can perform poorly when related to changes in community composition (Cooper et al., 2019 ). This highlights a current and critical disconnect between how assemblages are structured and how conservation is applied. There is also compelling evidence that neutral processes alone are not adequate to describe community structure (Connolly et al., 2014 ; McGill, 2003 ). These competing views likely represent continuum extremes which are also not mutually exclusive in that a strongly interacting community could coexist with more loosely assembled species (Liautaud et al., 2019 ). The often right‐skewed distribution of interaction strengths in many food webs supports this (i.e. many weak and few strong, e.g. Bascompte et al., 2005 ; Emmerson &amp; Raffaelli, 2004 ; Paine, 1992 ; Thorson &amp; Barnett, 2017 ; Vázquez et al., 2007 ; Wootton, 1997 ), as does work by Vergnon et al. ( 2009 ) which showed niche and neutral processes were both important structuring forces on a single assemblage. Are we therefore dealing with (a) definable communities each of which respond to environmental change as a unit, (b) assemblage continua where species respond independently from one another, or both and how best should these be assessed and conserved? Challenges associated with large‐scale biodiversity assessments have led to the proliferation of so‐called ‘big data’ (Edgar et al., 2016 ), such as online databases documenting taxonomy (e.g. the World Register of Marine Species; WoRMS Editorial Board, 2017 ), species distributions (e.g. MacroBen; Vanden Berghe et al., 2009 ; Global Biodiversity Information Facility; http://www.gbif.org/ ; Ocean Biogeographic Information System; OBIS, 2020 ), time series (e.g. BioTIME; Dornelas et al., 2018 ), and their relation to large‐scale environmental information (e.g. the Copernicus Marine Environment Monitoring Service; http://marine.copernicus.eu ). There is much less data at similar scales, however, on species interactions or dispersal, which play critical roles in structuring assemblages (Albouy et al., 2019 ; Bradbury et al., 2008 ). Furthermore, data relevant for estimating species distributions are often derived from museum collections or from surveys conducted for other reasons, including establishing protected areas or environmental impact assessment (Cooper &amp; Barry, 2017 ; Engemann et al., 2015 ; Norman &amp; White, 2019 ). As such, they may not be best suited to providing evidence of the underlying reasons for observed changes at large scales (Arkema et al., 2006 ; Dickey‐Collas, 2014 ; Kupschus et al., 2016 ). Such data also contain many other potential issues that could compromise our ability to detect and understand changes in biodiversity, including spatiotemporal variation in abundance (sample size), sampling effort, a mixture of taxonomic resolutions, and the incorporation of both count and incidence (i.e. presence only) data (Cardinale et al., 2018 ; Engemann et al., 2015 ; Norman &amp; White, 2019 ). Consequently, large‐scale biodiversity assessments have often relied on species distributions and species area relationships to define biodiversity hotspots (Elith &amp; Leathwick, 2009 ; Norman &amp; White, 2019 ), while lacking information on interactions, dispersal, temporal change, variation in the effect of area on biodiversity or sampling artefacts that could confound such predictions (Araújo &amp; Guisan, 2006 ; Gilman et al., 2010 ; Guilhaumon et al., 2008 ; Liautaud et al., 2019 ). Joint use of γ‐diversity (regional richness) with diversity partitioned between α (local richness) and β (dissimilarity) components offers a potential means to navigate these issues. Diversity partitioning is well established in the wider ecological literature (Chao et al., 2012 ; Hautmann, 2014 ; Jost, 2007 ; Na &amp; Kiessling, 2015 ; Olszewski, 2004 ; Whittaker, 1960 , 1972 ) but has not yet been incorporated into conservation programmes to assess status or inform where pressures on biodiversity could be mitigated. Yet, their incorporation could reveal the relative importance of local to large‐scale processes determining biodiversity patterns and thus whether it makes sense to clearly delineate a hotspot from other areas. Differences in response can also be indicative of how assemblage structure is changing, for example, large decreases in β‐diversity but not γ‐diversity would indicate species composition was homogenizing but that overall richness was unaffected (Dornelas et al., 2014 ; Magurran et al., 2018 ; McGill et al., 2015 ). Rarefaction and extrapolation with Hill numbers provide a unified framework within which to estimate these diversity metrics that can account for the sampling biases associated with variation in abundance and sampling effort, and can also be applied to many data types (Chao et al., 2014 ; Jost, 2007 ; Leinster &amp; Cobbold, 2012 ). Marine assemblages are unique in that they lack some of the dispersal constraints experienced by organisms in terrestrial ecosystems (Baselga et al., 2012 ; Jones, 2016 ; Kay &amp; Palumbi, 1987 ; Kinlan &amp; Gaines, 2003 ). They are nevertheless experiencing comparable rapid and profound defaunation with widespread impacts on biodiversity (Blowes et al., 2019 ; Dornelas et al., 2014 ; McCauley et al., 2015 ; Pimm et al., 2014 ; Webb &amp; Mindel, 2015 ). Much of the marine species biodiversity is found in the benthos which constitutes the largest single ecosystem on earth by area (Snelgrove, 1999 ; Snelgrove et al., 1997 ). The ability to clearly delineate marine benthic communities is an attractive prospect from an operational perspective since large areas could be categorized into manageable sampling units (e.g. Cooper et al., 2019 ). However, without evidence of sharp changes in assemblage structure, monitoring and conservation strategies which assume marine ecosystems can be compartmentalized remain contentious. Much work has been done to establish the drivers or at least environmental correlates of marine benthic faunal diversity patterns. Depth, sediment composition, various measures of water velocity or wave action and proximity to coast have all been shown to be useful descriptors (Barrio Froján et al., 2012 ; Duineveld et al., 1991 ; Rees et al., 1999 ; Renaud et al., 2009 ). Somerfield et al. ( 2009 ) showed that, rather than competition for resources which would be defined locally and favour assemblages composed of species less similar to one another, benthic assemblages tended to contain species more closely related to each other than would be expected by chance, and thus were likely organized primarily by large‐scale environmental processes. However, it was not clear if the diversity of the most abundant taxa, polychaetes, was independent of, or driven by both, local and large‐scale processes. Renaud et al. ( 2009 ) showed that local species richness was positively correlated with large‐scale richness. From a conservation perspective, it would be useful therefore to know whether local‐scale, large‐scale processes or some combination of these drive high biodiversity, and whether high local diversity is a reliable measure of high diversity at larger geographical scales. To address these evidence needs, we draw together data from across the UK Exclusive Economic Zone (UK EEZ), and across many different habitats (e.g. Andersen et al., 2018 ; Coltman et al., 2008 ; Cooper et al., 2019 ), where extensive spatial and temporal observations exist for benthic biota and prevailing environmental conditions. We focus on two large faunal datasets and observations between 1985 and 2016 where complementary covariate data exist: the first was compiled for a UK benthic macrofaunal distribution study (henceforth 'BM data'; Cooper &amp; Barry, 2017 ) containing count data for 1,964 species with 23,153 multi‐species observations (i.e. those collected at the same time and at the same location); the second was downloaded from the largest publicly available online database documenting the global distribution of marine species, Ocean Biogeographic Information System (OBIS, 2020 ), which contained 3,187 benthic species with a mixture of count and incidence data with 23,646 multi‐species observations (henceforth 'OBIS data’). To the authors’ knowledge, the combined dataset represents the largest used to assess UK marine benthic diversity with a total of 3,626 benthic species from 46,799 multi‐species observations. After accounting for survey effects, we estimate biodiversity across a range of scales to test the following hypotheses: (a) benthic biodiversity hotspots are inconsistent across metrics; (b) α‐, β‐ and γ‐diversity relate uniquely to covariates; and (c) both sharply defined ‘superorganism’ and loosely collected ‘individualistic’ communities exist along a β‐diversity continuum. We aimed to explore whether robust biodiversity hotspots can be clearly delineated and reveal which environmental drivers explain the most variation in α‐, β‐ and γ‐diversity. At the same time, this approach allowed us to test the limitations of using aggregated biodiversity data in this context. Taken together, this information will be valuable in highlighting current knowledge gaps, chief drivers of biodiversity change and the appropriate scales for assessment and conservation to operate. 2 MATERIALS AND METHODS 2.1 Benthic data collation We used benthic macrofaunal (BM) abundance data collated by Cooper and Barry ( 2017 ; https://doi.org/10.14466/CefasDataHub.34 ), consisting of 33,198 grab samples from 777 surveys collected between 1969 and 2016 from UK waters, sourced from both government and industry, including contributions from the aggregate dredging and energy sectors. Samples taken from known impacted sites, for example, within actively dredged locations, and species known to be reported inconsistently, for example, colonists or fish, were excluded. The data were collected with a variety of grab‐types, with 93% coming from either a 0.1 m 2 Hamon grab or a 0.1 m 2 Day grab, with the majority of surveys conducted post 2000 and between June and September. See Cooper and Barry ( 2017 ) for a detailed description of the complete dataset. Benthic survey data were also obtained from the Ocean Biogeographic Information System (Grassle, 2000 ; OBIS, 2020 ), the largest online free‐access global marine database of species records. The data used in this study were downloaded on 19/07/2017 and can be accessed at: https://doi.org/10.25607/obis.export.dda4657a . These data include incidence and, in some cases, abundance information for marine taxa within the UK EEZ between 1750 and 2014, with the majority of observations between 1980 and 2012. There were insufficient reported observations to assess biodiversity across spatial scales post‐2012, so these entries were removed. Taxonomic information was standardized and identified as benthic or otherwise using the World Register of Marine Species online Taxon Match Tool and Functional Group classifications, respectively (WoRMS; www.marinespecies.org ). WoRMS has aggregated data on species attributes including broad ‘functional groups’, which we use to identify benthic faunal taxa. We do this using a dedicated R function ( https://github.com/tomjwebb/WoRMS‐functional‐groups ) which accesses the WoRMS API using the worrms R package (Chamberlain, 2019 ). Our ‘benthos’ group includes all species categorized in WoRMS as endobenthos, epibenthos, hyperbenthos, macrobenthos, meiobenthos and microbenthos, as well as those originally classified simply as benthos. When separate functional groups are recorded for different life stages, we always use the group for the adult stage. The resulting set of benthic taxa were broadly comparable across OBIS and BM data based on phylum occurrences (Table S1 ). We retained benthic occurrences contained in OBIS data regardless of survey methodology, meaning that our final dataset included records from a range of methods including benthic grabs, trawls and dredges. Therefore, OBIS data were standardized to incidence for meaningful comparison. Multi‐species observations with low numbers of observations and/or species could be indicative of a survey targeting specific species, while not recording others. Those with fewer than 30 observations and/or 10 species were therefore not considered. OBIS data included in this study consisted of 3,187 benthic species from 23,646 multi‐species observations. Drawing on diverse data sources is typical to biodiversity hotspot assessment (Norman &amp; White, 2019 ). This is because it is essential to aggregate observations from across habitats or species that may require different survey methodology. For instance, sampling a reef with a benthic grab would be destructive and thus not appropriate, but assessing biodiversity across reefs and sedimentary habitats is. This also applies to different species found in the same space, but which may be surveyed better using different gears, such as those larger dwelling on the seabed or smaller living within the sediment. The only way this can be done currently, and at large scale to determine marine benthic biodiversity hotspots for conservation is by drawing on diverse data sources which may include a combination of survey gears. However, we appreciate that such differences in survey methodology could confound diversity patterns. We therefore provide supplementary results to test our hypotheses when using only the BM data which were all collected with benthic grabs in soft sediments. BM and OBIS data were combined and all transformed to incidence data to produce the largest UK marine benthic dataset the authors are aware of, consisting of 3,626 benthic species from 46,799 multi‐species observations. The OBIS data we used did not share any duplicate observations with the BM data. Where we integrated data, we used species incidence information which is not susceptible to issues associated with duplicate observations (duplicated species incidence records still give a value of 1; see Figure S1 for spatial and temporal distributions across datasets). We focussed on the period 1985–2016, where complementary covariate data exist (see below), and considered only records identified to species. 2.2 Biodiversity estimation We recognize that because the datasets have unique properties (e.g. different spatial and temporal distribution of observations; Figure S1 ), we cannot make meaningful comparisons between hotspot locations. However, we look for similarities in β‐diversity patterns across data to reveal whether evidence for distinct communities is common to both while also using the combined dataset to provide the most spatially and temporally comprehensive assessment possible across all of the diversity metrics. Specifically, BM count data enable estimates to be based on rarefaction from local to regional scales, whereas incidence data (i.e. OBIS and BM combined) have higher spatial and temporal coverage than the BM data alone, but only γ‐diversity estimates are based on rarefaction (i.e. where multiple cells enable sample‐based rarefaction, whereas α‐ or β‐diversity use observed values). We anticipated that variation in sample size (e.g. individuals encountered), in the number of observations per site (primarily affecting α‐diversity), in the number of areas surveyed (primarily affecting γ‐diversity), and in the sum of the distances between surveyed areas (i.e. larger areas compared to smaller areas) could affect diversity estimates. And because β‐diversity here is estimated using α‐ and γ‐diversity (see below), it is likely susceptible to variation in all these potential survey effects. We therefore devised a spatially gridded sampling structure to perform random sub‐sampling, thereby enabling us to control the number of multi‐species observations assessed within a given area. Data were nested in 5 km grid cells (henceforth, ‘sample cells’) using latitude and longitude, together with month and year information, which identified whether multiple unique local multi‐species observations existed per sample cell for any given time. Furthermore, we include the number of cells and the sum of the distances between them as covariates in a Random Forest analysis (see below) to reveal whether survey effort was affecting diversity estimates irrespective of whether they were based on rarefaction. Estimates of α‐diversity were always made at the level of unique multi‐species observations and based on either observed species or rarefaction where we use incidence or count data, respectively. Unique multi‐species observations based on species incidence were used to estimate γ‐diversity within a 25 km radius of each sample cell using rarefaction for all datasets (analogous to regional richness). We only considered areas where there were at least three sample cells within a radius of 25 km required to estimate β‐ and γ‐diversity so that the distribution of our diversity estimates correspond exactly. Estimates based on rarefaction were made using the R package iNEXT (Hsieh et al., 2014 ) and were considered independently to those based on observed values in our analyses. β‐diversity was calculated as: (1) β = γ / α ¯ , where α ¯ represents mean α‐diversity (Jost, 2007 ; Tuomisto, 2010 ). β‐diversity is thus an estimate of the effective number of communities in a given area and can be expressed on a relative scale as: (2) β = γ ‐ α ¯ / N ‐ 1 α ¯ , where N represents the number of sample cells (henceforth referred to as turnover). We also looked at pairwise turnover (Simpson dissimilarity, after Baselga, 2010 ) between cells within a 25 km radius to reveal whether there were sharp changes in assemblage structure between nearby cells that may be missed using 25 km turnover which uses mean α‐diversity. Whether 25 km or pairwise, we should expect turnover to have a bimodal distribution with peaks close to either extreme if superorganism structure is prevalent (i.e. showing very similar and/ or very dissimilar local site differences), but more intermediate values would suggest that individualistic processes prevail. Pairwise dissimilarity was estimated in R using the betapart package (Baselga &amp; Orme, 2012 ). While the scales of assessment are somewhat arbitrary, our aim was to assess whether decomposing diversity into its component parts could tell us more than the individual metrics on their own while controlling for variation in survey effort. To do this, we needed to look across spatial scales and across datasets in a systematic way. These scales could be readily adjusted for specific management purposes. This proved essential as, even after rarefaction and extrapolation, diversity estimates were primarily driven by survey effects (Figures S2 and S3 ). Hence, we standardized effort using random sub‐sampling across all analyses presented in the results such that γ‐ and β‐diversity estimates were based on only ten unique multi‐species observations and α‐diversity on a single multi‐species observation (see Figure S4 for a schematic of this design). We retain the sum of the distances in our models using the sub‐sampled data to show whether sample clustering was still an important factor affecting our diversity estimates. 2.3 Covariate data collation Using the same spatial grid as for diversity estimation, we collated environmental variables considered important determinants of benthic assemblage structure (e.g. Barrio Froján et al., 2012 ; Cooper &amp; Barry, 2017 ; Couce, Engelhard, et al., 2020 ; Davies et al., 2004 ; Renaud et al., 2009 ), including depth, sediment composition, bed shear stress, temperature, salinity, nitrate, phosphate, dissolved oxygen, chlorophyll, bottom current speed and particulate organic carbon. We also included data on fishing pressure (hours fishing per year) derived from an analysis of Vessel Monitoring System (VMS) data for UK vessels larger than 15 m and segregated by gear type. This was only available for the period 2009–2016, since VMS usage was not widespread before that; we approximated the average of those 7 years to the entire study period. We acknowledge that fishing effort changes over time, however such changes tend to be slow and gradual due to fishing vessels being based at particular ports, having traditional fishing grounds and fishing preferences, and having quotas associated with particular areas (e.g. see Couce, Schratzberger, et al., 2020 ). For the 7 years with data, we found a strong correlation between the annual values and the average of the 7 years (see Figure S5 ). For the full list of spatial gridded environmental and anthropogenic pressure covariates and their sources, see Table 1 . For each of these gridded covariates, we also looked at the mean of pairwise differences between surveyed sample cells, which provides a measure of their heterogeneity (e.g. depth difference between cells). The labels referring to these pairwise differences have the suffix ‘ df ’ added to the variable name (variable names are listed in Table 1 ). TABLE 1 Gridded environmental and anthropogenic pressure datasets used in the study, their characteristics (units, time period covered and spatial resolution) and sources. The label assigned to the variable in our study is indicated in the first column in parentheses, or when not provided it matches the variable name. Variables in our results referring to pairwise differences have the suffix ‘ df ’ added to the variable name Covariate and variable name Unit Time coverage Resolution Data source Depth m 30 s General Bathymetric Chart of the Oceans (GEBCO; www.gebco.net ) Temperature K 1985–2013 ⅟₉° longitude by ⅟₁₅° latitude Modelled with version 3.4 of the Nucleus for European Modelling of the Ocean (NEMO) ocean model (Madec, 2008 ) coupled to the European Regional Seas Ecosystem Model (ERSEM; Butenschön et al., 2016 ). Datasets available from http://marine.copernicus.eu/ ; datasets ‘NORTHWESTSHELF_ REANALYSIS_PHYS_004_009’ and ‘NORTHWESTSHELF_REANALYSIS_BIO_004_011’. Salinity e −3 (N/A) Nitrate concentration (‘ Nitrate mean’ or ‘ log10(nitrate)’ ) mmol/m 3 Phosphate concentration (‘ Phosphate mean’ or ‘ log10(phosphate)’ ) mmol/m 3 Dissolved oxygen (‘ Dissolved oxygen mean’ or ‘ log10(DO)’ ) mmol/m 3 Current speed (‘ Bottom current’ ) m/s Chlorophyll‐ a concentration (‘ Chlorophyll’ ) mg/m 3 1998–2016 4 km Ocean Colour Climate Change Initiative dataset, Version 3.1, European Space Agency, available online at http://www.esa‐oceancolour‐cci.org . Sediment fraction of: Sand Mud Gravel Proportion (0–1) N/A 7.5 arc seconds Dataset described by Mitchell et al. ( 2019 ). Particulate organic carbon ( POC ) % N/A 500 m Dataset described by Diesing et al. ( 2017 ). Shear stress (‘ Shear stress’ for mean of the 7 years, ‘Shear stress SD’ for standard deviation) m/s 1975–1981 0.125° Modelled by GETM (Burchard &amp; Bolding, 2002 ), hindcast model run described in Bricheno et al. ( 2015 ). Fishing pressure for: Beam trawls Otter trawls Pelagic trawls Hours per year 2009–2016 0.05° Analysis of Fisheries Administrations’ VMS data provided by the MMO, for UK vessels larger than 15 m. John Wiley &amp; Sons, Ltd In addition to the gridded covariate data, we included the mean annual index values for the Atlantic Multidecadal Oscillation (AMO) and the North Atlantic Oscillation (NAO). These two indices track large‐scale environmental change associated with contrasting precipitation and warm and cool climate phases, the AMO being of lower frequency (60–80 years) relative to the NAO (&lt;30 years; Enfield et al., 2001 ; Hurrell, 1995 ; Jones et al., 1997 ). Both indexes have been linked with changes in marine plankton, benthic invertebrates and fish assemblages, through to marine ecosystem‐level change (e.g. Edwards et al., 2013 ; Nye et al., 2014 ; Ottersen et al., 2001 ). We estimate the colonization potential of the wider species pool for each sample cell and each year via sample‐based rarefaction by randomly selecting 50 cells (or at least 30 cells where data from &lt;50 cells was available) from the wider regions beyond 25 km (wider regions are defined in Figure S1 as northwest, northeast, southeast and southwest UK waters). Year, longitude, latitude, distance to the nearest coast and the influence of survey effects that could confound our diversity assessment, namely the number of unique multi‐species observations per cell, the number of cells surveyed within 25 km and the sum of the pairwise distances between cells (i.e. sample clustering), were included in our full list of covariates. Pairwise Pearson correlation coefficients for all covariates considered were computed to assess multicollinearity between them using data from where we had multi‐species observations in the R package stats (R Core Team, 2017 ). A variable was removed if it correlated with another &gt;0.7, retaining those which represent a direct measure of environmental conditions (e.g. temperature instead of latitude) and those more readily collected (e.g. salinity instead of the difference between salinity across sites; Figures S5 and S6 ). Where there were few temporal observations and the mean correlated with its temporal counterpart, for example, fishing effort datasets, we used the mean. Any further missing covariate data were imputed using the R package missForest (Stekhoven &amp; Bühlmann, 2012 ). 2.4 Biodiversity assessment For the purpose of our analyses, hotspots are defined here as the 10 most diverse areas ranked using either γ‐, β‐ or α‐diversity. We tested whether hotspot locations were conserved across diversity metrics and spatial scales. Variation in survey distribution over time meant we could not demonstrate if hotspots were temporally conserved (Figure S1 ). Instead, we tested for the crossing of rarefaction curves over time to reveal the consistency of scale dependence (Chase et al., 2018 ). Consistently, crossing rarefaction curves indicate that the ranking of sites by richness re‐orders as the spatial scale considered increases. This would undermine the concept of defining hotspots using one metric and/ or one spatial scale. Random Forest analysis (Breiman, 2001 ) was used to understand the relationships between diversity metrics and covariates because of their ability to detect nonlinear responses and interaction effects between variables (e.g. Lawler et al., 2006 ). Regression trees recursively split the dataset into the most homogeneous groups possible in relation to the response variable. Random Forests are a collection of regression trees trained on bootstrap samples of the training set, with the model selecting a randomly chosen subset of the covariates to determine each split of a tree. Due to spatial and temporal clustering of observations inherent in collated survey data (Figure S1 ) and potential for autocorrelation between proximal observations in space and time to affect our results, we followed the approach described by Hengl et al. ( 2018 ) to explicitly add spatiotemporal predictive variables to the Random Forest analysis. Specifically, we include the sampling year (to account for temporal autocorrelation) and the distance from the sample cell to the centre of every other sample cell in the grid up to a maximum of 100 km (to account for spatial autocorrelation at local to mid‐scales). The models were built in R using the ranger package (Wright &amp; Ziegler, 2017 ). The relative importance of the covariates in each Random Forest model was based on node impurity, a standard approach based on the reductions of the variance of the response variable each time that a covariate is used for a split. Partial dependence plots were used to show the relationship between the response and a single covariate while keeping the other covariates fixed at their average values (this may not be realistic and lead to misleading results in the case of strongly correlated variables, so these plots should be interpreted with care). We compared our full model results, which included environmental covariates, to those with only survey effects as covariates (i.e. year, latitude, longitude, distance to coast and sum of the distances between surveys) and observed diversity estimates to disentangle the effects of environmental change and survey distribution (i.e. temporal changes in the spatial distribution of observations inherent in collated survey data) on our results. Change in relation to ‘Year’ in our survey effects models represents the diversity we might expect to observe in the absence of survey effects; whereas change in relation to ‘Year’ in our full model reveals any outstanding temporal variation in diversity not captured by our covariates. 3 RESULTS Hotspots were largely inconsistent across metrics (Figure 1 ; Figure S7 ; Table S2 ) and richness was scale‐dependent over time (Figure 2 ), in support of our first hypothesis. Using the combined dataset alongside covariates, our random forest models captured 65.6%, 72.2% and 36.8% of the variation (based on out of bag R ‐squared) in γ‐, β‐ and α‐diversity, respectively. Each diversity metric related uniquely to the covariates, in support of our second hypothesis (Figures 3 , 4 , 5 ; Figure S8 ). Regional factors relating to habitat heterogeneity, including variation in shear stress, depth and substrate, as well as larger‐scale factors such as proximity to coast and longitude (the latter capturing a decreasing species richness gradient moving from the Atlantic to the North Sea species pools), and local factors including substrate, phosphate and chlorophyll concentrations were important predictors of diversity across our models (Figures 3 , 4 , 5 ; Figures S9 and S10 ). This suggests that regional‐ to ecosystem‐scale processes chiefly determined assemblage structure and the distribution of biodiversity hotspots, even at local scales, with small‐scale habitat characteristics, such as substrate playing an important but subordinate role. Chlorophyll, phosphate and differences in dissolved oxygen concentrations ranked the most important gradients associated with anthropogenic pressure (i.e. a potential coastal eutrophication gradient; Figure 4 ; Figures S9 and S10 ), the former two relating negatively to α‐ and γ‐diversity, the latter relating positively to β‐diversity. Various trawling pressures were consistently poor predictors in our models. FIGURE 1 The top 10 marine benthic ‘hotspots’ (large points) plotted over spatial estimates of γ‐, β‐ and α‐diversity across the UK EEZ using the combined dataset. Values are based on means where multiple temporal observations exist FIGURE 2 Top panels: rarefaction of marine benthic assemblages used to estimate γ‐diversity for years 1990, 2000 and 2010. Crossing curves demonstrate that the sites rank‐order based on richness is not conserved as the number of sample cells (i.e. spatial units) increases, and this feature is consistent over time ( n = 50 cells were randomly selected in 2000 and 2010 where there were data for &gt;50). We highlight areas which may have relatively low to intermediate species richness based on a low number of sample cells (black lines) compared with other areas (e.g. blue dotted and green dashed lines) but, because of higher dissimilarity between local assemblages, tend to have some of the highest species richness values at larger scales. Based on these results, we would draw contrasting conclusions about which area was most diverse depending on whether we looked at 1, 20 and 60 sites within a region. Bottom panels: maps show differences in spatial data distribution between respective years (red = data collected in that year, blue = all data) FIGURE 3 Variable importance based on node impurity ordered along the y ‐axis from most important (top) to least important (bottom) following Random Forest analysis on the combined data. The suffix ‘ df ’ represents a variable's heterogeneity based on mean pairwise differences across selected sample cells within a 25 km radius FIGURE 4 Partial dependence plots showing model predictions (red line) of γ‐, β‐ and α‐diversity ( y ‐axis) using the combined dataset in response to the six most important covariates ( x ‐axis) as determined by node impurity (Figure 3 ) while keeping other variables fixed at their average values. The suffix ‘ df ’ represents a variable's heterogeneity based on mean pairwise differences across selected sample cells within a 25 km radius FIGURE 5 Observed versus partial dependence plots for full model and survey effects model estimates of temporal diversity. Change was partly captured by our environmental and survey covariates, revealed by the more limited change related to ‘Year’ in the full models, followed by the survey effects models, with most variation in our observed values Comparing output from our full models to our survey effects models and observed values reveals that temporal change in diversity was partly captured by environmental covariates and partly by survey covariates with some remaining unexplained variation (Figure 5 ). There was more limited change related to ‘Year’ in the full models, followed by the survey effects models, with most variation in our observed values. Estimates based on our survey effects models (i.e. what we might expect to observe in the absence of survey effects) showed declines in γ‐ and α‐diversity of 14.9% and 19.7%, respectively, over the study period, and variation in β‐diversity of 26.5% with little overall difference between 1985 and 2016 estimates. We found evidence of both individualistic and organismic assemblage structure with considerable variation in species turnover that was largely consistent across regions and data (i.e. where estimates were based on observed values in the combined incidence data or via rarefaction using BM count data), in support of our third hypothesis (Figure 6 ). The majority of pairwise and 25 km turnover values were intermediate rather than distributed bimodally between the extremes. Bimodal peaks were evident in pairwise turnover between intermediate and high values demonstrating that almost completely unique assemblages were observed in some nearby cells. However, such a peak was not evident in 25 km turnover suggesting that sharp dissimilarities were outweighed by those more intermediate, and thus individualistic processes were more prominent in general. FIGURE 6 Density plots showing the distribution of pairwise and 25 km turnover estimates (i.e. β‐diversity) between cells sampled within the same year using the combined and BM datasets, respectively. Values were mostly intermediate, rather than bimodally distributed between extremes, indicating that many species were shared between unique multi‐species observations and thus individualistic processes were more prominent in general. Data have been split across UK regions (Figure S1 ) to show that this pattern was largely conserved through space 4 DISCUSSION The hotspot concept is intuitive, so it is understandable why it has such resonance in biodiversity conservation (Marchese, 2015 ; Myers et al., 2000 ). Here, we offer new insights into how such hotspots are generated and how they behave in space and time. The novelty in our study does not lie with the distribution of marine benthic biodiversity hotspots nor the influence of specific covariates per se, but rather the multi‐dimensional perspective afforded using α‐, β‐ and γ‐diversity together, in the scale dependence of the responses to covariates and the ubiquity of gradual change in assemblage structure. These findings are key to informing marine management and conservation because strategies that act only locally, assume clearly delineated assemblages or focus on a single component of diversity risk failing to detect change, identify its direction or disentangle the influence of local from larger‐scale processes, which could undermine effective intervention (Chase et al., 2018 , 2019 ; McGill et al., 2015 ). Meaningfully incorporating a multi‐dimensional perspective of biodiversity into national and international conservation programmes, monitoring or regulatory frameworks, such as via the joint use of α‐, β‐ and γ‐diversity, is thus timely (Isbell et al., 2017 ; Purvis et al., 2018 ). Differences between the North Sea and Atlantic species pools captured by the longitudinal gradient was an important predictor of α‐ and γ‐diversity (Figures 1 and 4 ; Figures S7 and S8 ) which suggests the success of local measures will be contingent on conserving species and their ability to disperse at large scales (Witman et al., 2004 ), beyond the wider regions we used to assess colonization potential (Figure S1 ). Using species relatedness rather than patterns in α‐, β‐ and γ‐diversity, Somerfield et al. ( 2009 ) showed that marine benthic assemblages were primarily organized by regional to ecosystem‐scale environmental gradients, adding support to our findings. Also, contrasting patterns of change in α‐ and β‐diversity have been found in other benthic marine assemblages to the extent that a ‘hotspot’ can also be a ‘coldspot’ for biodiversity (Price, 2002 ). Dornelas et al. ( 2014 ) and Blowes et al. ( 2019 ) found that change in temporal turnover, rather than richness, was the principal driver of biodiversity change in global studies across many taxa and biomes, and this was strongest but most variable in marine ecosystems. We find comparable declines in richness to some marine assemblages contained within those global studies, plus we assess assemblage turnover in space as opposed to time, to test for sharp spatial change between assemblages, so our results are not necessarily inconsistent. The novelty here is that we relate spatial and temporal change in diversity to potentially confounding survey effects and environmental gradients, and explicitly address scale‐dependent relationships to direct future assessments, policymakers and managers to where along these gradients change in assemblage structure can be anticipated. Temporal declines in α‐diversity can partly be explained by its negative relationship with the AMO (Figure S9 ). Altered thermal and hydrological regimes between AMO cold‐negative (up until ~1997) and warm‐positive (~1997 until present) phases may be responsible for this relationship affecting, for example, the supply of nutrients, thermal conditions, dispersal and higher‐level food web effects (Edwards et al., 2013 ; Nye et al., 2014 ). However, the exact mechanisms are not clear and warrant future investigation, and the AMO had relatively little effect on γ‐ and β‐diversity. Considering the remaining temporal changes in diversity, these were decoupled across metrics with declines in α‐diversity evident first, followed by declines in γ‐diversity, while β‐diversity was increasing between ~1990 and 2010, before sharply decreasing after 2012 with no single clear driver. This suggests that many different pressures may be acting locally such that their heterogeneous but cumulative effects have led to widespread biodiversity change, and/or that other environmental drivers not captured in our covariates were important (e.g. novel pesticides; Van Der Sluijs et al., 2015 ). Warming from climate change is another such possibility which we cannot rule out because our data do not track its effect on assemblages through time, among other candidate covariates which we discuss below. The main anthropogenic gradients we considered were nutrient concentrations and fishing effort. Sites with altered substrate characteristics, for example, following dredging, were not considered but such activities need careful management given that the proportion of gravel in sediments and its heterogeneity were important determinants of diversity (see also Cooper &amp; Barry, 2017 ). Species richness tended to be negatively related to gradients associated with eutrophication which were higher in coastal waters (Figure 4 ; Figure S9 ). α‐ and γ‐diversity increased above phosphate concentrations of ~0.61 μM which broadly supports the lower threshold mean (0.45 μM) used by OSPAR to assess eutrophication in UK marine waters (Foden et al., 2011 ). Considering that riverine nutrient inputs have been in decline following policy changes since the late 1980s (Capuzzo et al., 2017 ; Foden et al., 2011 ; Lenhart et al., 2010 ; Tett et al., 2007 ), other contaminants, such as pesticides, not included in our covariates, could also be responsible for declines in species richness and warrant future investigation. Like our study, Couce, Engelhard, et al. ( 2020 ) found shear stress to be the primary driver of change across North Sea marine benthic assemblages. However, they showed that beam and otter trawling had pronounced effects with clear thresholds of change on specific benthic genera that were not evident at the assemblage level in our assessment. It has also been shown that species richness can be negatively related to trawling in a meta‐analysis of mostly western Europe and north eastern USA control‐impact studies (Hiddink et al., 2020 ). There are a few possible and not mutually exclusive reasons for these contrasting results: our data are not directly comparable as they cover different areas; although many taxa may respond to trawling, UK marine benthic diversity may be largely insensitive to recent pressure following centuries of extensive fishing (Barrett et al., 2004 ; Thurstan et al., 2010 ); and our trawl data, which are highly spatially resolved but averaged over time, may not be a good indicator of trawling pressure when our observations were made. It would be useful in future therefore to specifically select sites where temporal trawl and survey data correspond and apply the threshold approach after Couce, Engelhard, et al. ( 2020 ) to the more extensive dataset presented here. Such an approach could reveal where along anthropogenic gradients such biotic thresholds exist and thus gauge where pressures become unsustainable. Even after rarefaction, diversity estimates were largely driven by effort before we applied random sub‐sampling. This is because the effective number of assemblages sampled (i.e. β‐diversity) increased with survey effort, affecting the shape of the accumulation curve which systematically increased the asymptote (Figures S2 and S3 ; see also Whittaker, 1960 ). Studies which do not explicitly address survey effects through both time and space before applying rarefaction, therefore risk reporting change associated with effort, which can vary dramatically (Figure 2 ; Figure S1 ), rather than biodiversity change per se . Spatial and temporal change in species richness could therefore be missed or misinterpreted if survey effects are not addressed prior to estimating diversity. We strongly advocate presenting diversity estimates alongside potential survey effects to make this transparent in future assessments, for example, using a spatially structured approach such as the one we present. Future biodiversity assessments must therefore carefully control the number and distribution of samples, including measures for sample clustering, in both time and space to detect change and reveal its causes. Large‐scale spatial and temporal change in diversity cannot be disentangled if data only exist for a unique area or a unique combination of areas over time, constraining subsequent analyses. We only assess trends at local to regional scales because the substantial annual variation in the spatial distribution of survey effort presents a major challenge to estimating temporal change in marine benthic diversity at the UK scale which we do not attempt to address. However, simply increasing the number of annual observations alone may not improve our understanding of the causes of change. A truly integrated ecosystem monitoring programme that explicitly considers how processes link sampled components would provide important insights into causal drivers of biodiversity change that are not possible using such data collated without an overarching design (Arkema et al., 2006 ; Kupschus et al., 2016 ). For this reason, we must stress that our environmental‐diversity modelling results are exploratory and do not conclusively show significant declines in UK marine benthic species richness. Rather, they show noteworthy trends relevant to biodiversity conservation and future monitoring and assessment practices which could, for example, be applied to predict where we might find new areas of high biodiversity by filling in the gaps in Figure 1 where there is currently little or no biological data. By combining the structured and targeted BM dataset with the unstructured, opportunistic data from OBIS, we aimed to benefit from the strengths inherent in each to derive a more comprehensive picture of benthic biodiversity in space and time than either resources would enable alone. The importance of drawing on multiple sources of data in such biogeographic studies has been emphasized elsewhere (Chollett &amp; Robertson, 2020 ). We show how some of the limitations in such data collations can be addressed and were able to reveal that the prevailing structuring force of the UK marine benthos was individualistic. Dispersal and variation in interaction strength also play significant roles in reducing β‐diversity (Liautaud et al., 2019 ). It is therefore rarely clear if nearby observations come from one or multiple assemblages, assemblage continua or some combination of these, and this has profound implications for how an area is assessed and conserved. Our findings do not preclude the use of strata as a pragmatic approach to surveying large areas with finite resources, and in also highlighting areas with unique assemblages whose loss would represent wider regional species loss. Rather, we highlight the importance of retaining information and a degree of flexibility in future monitoring designs useful for biodiversity assessments that are not beholden to strict delineations between areas that may not exist (Dickey‐Collas, 2014 ; Kupschus et al., 2016 ; Murdoch et al., 2014 ). Without assuming clear delineations between areas, joint use of α‐, β‐ and γ‐diversity provides a multidimensional perspective of biodiversity which is key to its assessment (Chase et al., 2019 ; Isbell et al., 2017 ), revealing how a given area will respond to environmental change and the appropriate scale for management to be effective, for example. We hope insights from this study inform both the design of future monitoring programmes and conservation policy so that anthropogenic pressures on biodiversity are better assessed, understood and mitigated. AUTHOR CONTRIBUTION M.S.A.T., E.C., M.S. and T.J.W. conceived the ideas and designed the methodology; M.S.A.T., E.C., T.J.W., K.M.C. and M.G. collated the data; M.S.A.T., E.C., M.S., T.J.W. and K.M.C. analysed the data; M.S.A.T. led the writing of the manuscript. All authors contributed critically to the drafts and gave final approval for publication. Supporting information Supplementary Material Click here for additional data file. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS M.S.A.T., E.C., M.S. and K.M.C. were funded by the Integrated Monitoring project led by Sven Kupschus (DP410) and Defra Marine Biodiversity SLA (MB0129); M.G., T.J.W. and M.S. were supported by the Natural Environment Research Council and Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs (grant number NE/L003279/1, Marine Ecosystems Research Programme). The authors additionally wish to thank the MMO for authorizing the use of the VMS fishing pressure data, and Lenka Fronkova and Roi Martinez for analysing it and producing the gridded product that was used in the analysis. DATA AVAILABILITY STATEMENT The data that support the findings of this study are openly available from the Cefas DataHub at https://doi.org/10.14466/cefasdatahub.34 and OBIS at https://doi.org/10.25607/obis.export.dda4657a . REFERENCES Albouy , C. , Archambault , P. , Appeltans , W. , Araújo , M. B. , Beauchesne , D. , Cazelles , K. , Cirtwill , A. R. , Fortin , M.‐J. , Galiana , N. , Leroux , S. J. , Pellissier , L. , Poisot , T. , Stouffer , D. B. , Wood , S. A. , &amp; Gravel , D. ( 2019 ). The marine fish food web is globally connected . Nature Ecology and Evolution , 3 ( 8 ), 1153 – 1161 . 10.1038/s41559-019-0950-y 31358950 Andersen , J. H. , Manca , E. , Agnesi , S. , Al‐Hamdani , Z. , Lillis , H. , Mo , G. , Populus , J. , Reker , J. , Tunesi , L. , &amp; Vasquez , M. ( 2018 ). European broad‐scale seabed habitat maps support implementation of ecosystem‐based management . Open Journal of Ecology , 08 ( 02 ), 86 – 103 . 10.4236/oje.2018.82007 Araújo , M. B. , &amp; Guisan , A. ( 2006 ). Five (or so) challenges for species distribution modelling . Journal of Biogeography , 33 ( 10 ), 1677 – 1688 . 10.1111/j.1365-2699.2006.01584.x Arkema , K. K. , Abramson , S. C. , &amp; Dewsbury , B. M. ( 2006 ). Marine ecosystem‐based management: From characterization to implementation . Frontiers in Ecology and the Environment , 4 ( 10 ), 525 – 532 . Barrett , J. H. , Locker , A. M. , &amp; Roberts , C. M. ( 2004 ). The origins of intensive marine fishing in medieval Europe: The English evidence . Proceedings of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences , 271 ( 1556 ), 2417 – 2421 . 10.1098/rspb.2004.2885 PMC1691892 15590590 Barrio Froján , C. R. S. , Bolam , S. G. , Eggleton , J. D. , &amp; Mason , C. ( 2012 ). Large‐scale faunal characterisation of marine benthic sedimentary habitats around the UK . Journal of Sea Research , 69 , 53 – 65 . 10.1016/j.seares.2012.02.005 Bascompte , J. , Melián , C. J. , &amp; Sala , E. ( 2005 ). Interaction strength combinations and the overfishing of a marine food web . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America , 102 ( 15 ), 5443 – 5447 . 10.1073/pnas.0501562102 15802468 PMC556268 Baselga , A. ( 2010 ). Partitioning the turnover and nestedness components of beta diversity . Global Ecology and Biogeography , 19 ( 1 ), 134 – 143 . 10.1111/j.1466-8238.2009.00490.x Baselga , A. , Gómez‐Rodríguez , C. , &amp; Lobo , J. M. ( 2012 ). Historical legacies in world amphibian diversity revealed by the turnover and nestedness components of beta diversity . PLoS One , 7 ( 2 ). 10.1371/journal.pone.0032341 PMC3285684 22384222 Baselga , A. , &amp; Orme , C. D. L. ( 2012 ). Betapart: An R package for the study of beta diversity . Methods in Ecology and Evolution , 3 ( 5 ), 808 – 812 . 10.1111/j.2041-210X.2012.00224.x Blowes , S. A. , Supp , S. R. , Antão , L. H. , Bates , A. , Bruelheide , H. , Chase , J. M. , Moyes , F. , Magurran , A. , McGill , B. , Myers‐Smith , I. H. , Winter , M. , Bjorkman , A. D. , Bowler , D. E. , Byrnes , J. E. K. , Gonzalez , A. , Hines , J. , Isbell , F. , Jones , H. P. , Navarro , L. M. , … Dornelas , M. ( 2019 ). The geography of biodiversity change in marine and terrestrial assemblages . Science , 366 ( 6463 ), 339 – 345 . 10.1126/science.aaw1620 31624208 Bradbury , I. R. , Laurel , B. , Snelgrove , P. V. R. , Bentzen , P. , &amp; Campana , S. E. ( 2008 ). Global patterns in marine dispersal estimates: The influence of geography, taxonomic category and life history . Proceedings of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences , 275 ( 1644 ), 1803 – 1809 . 10.1098/rspb.2008.0216 PMC2587791 18445556 Breiman , L. ( 2001 ). Random forests . Machine Learning , 45 ( 1 ), 5 – 32 . 10.1023/A:1010933404324 Bricheno , L. M. , Wolf , J. , &amp; Aldridge , J. ( 2015 ). Distribution of natural disturbance due to wave and tidal bed currents around the UK . Continental Shelf Research , 109 ( November ), 67 – 77 . 10.1016/j.csr.2015.09.013 Burchard , H. , &amp; Bolding , K. ( 2002 ). GETM, a general estuarine transport model . Scientific documentation. In Technical report EUR 20253 en . Technical report, European Commission, Ispra. Butchart , S. H. M. , Walpole , M. , Collen , B. , Van Strien , A. , Scharlemann , J. P. W. , Almond , R. E. A. , Baillie , J. E. M. , Bomhard , B. , Brown , C. , Bruno , J. , Carpenter , K. E. , Carr , G. M. , Chanson , J. , Chenery , A. M. , Csirke , J. , Davidson , N. C. , Dentener , F. , Foster , M. , Galli , A. , … Watson , R. ( 2010 ). Global biodiversity: Indicators of recent declines . Science , 328 ( 5982 ), 1164 – 1168 . 10.1126/science.1187512 20430971 Butenschön , M. , Clark , J. , Aldridge , J. N. , Icarus Allen , J. , Artioli , Y. , Blackford , J. , &amp; Torres , R. ( 2016 ). ERSEM 15.06: A generic model for marine biogeochemistry and the ecosystem dynamics of the lower trophic levels . Geoscientific Model Development , 9 ( 4 ), 1293 – 1339 . 10.5194/gmd-9-1293-2016 Capuzzo , E. , Lynam , C. P. , Barry , J. , Stephens , D. , Forster , R. M. , Greenwood , N. , McQuatters‐Gollop , A. , Silva , T. , van Leeuwen , S. M. , &amp; Engelhard , G. H. ( 2017 ). A decline in primary production in the North Sea over 25 years, associated with reductions in zooplankton abundance and fish stock recruitment . Global Change Biology , 24 ( 1 ), e352 – e364 . 10.1111/gcb.13916 28944532 Cardinale , B. J. , Gonzalez , A. , Allington , G. R. H. , &amp; Loreau , M. ( 2018 ). Is local biodiversity declining or not? A summary of the debate over analysis of species richness time trends . Biological Conservation , 219 , 175 – 183 . 10.1016/j.biocon.2017.12.021 Chamberlain , S. ( 2019 ). worrms: World register of marine species (WoRMS) client . https://cran.r‐project.org/package=worrms Chao , A. , Chiu , C. H. , Hsieh , T. C. , &amp; Inouye , B. D. ( 2012 ). Proposing a resolution to debates on diversity partitioning . Ecology , 93 ( 9 ), 2037 – 2051 . 10.1890/11-1817.1 23094376 Chao , A. , Gotelli , N. J. , Hsieh , T. C. , Sander , E. L. , Ma , K. H. , Colwell , R. K. , &amp; Ellison , A. M. ( 2014 ). Rarefaction and extrapolation with Hill numbers: A framework for sampling and estimation in species diversity studies . Ecological Monographs , 84 ( 1 ), 45 – 67 . 10.1890/13-0133.1 Chase , J. M. , McGill , B. J. , McGlinn , D. J. , May , F. , Blowes , S. A. , Xiao , X. , Knight , T. M. , Purschke , O. , &amp; Gotelli , N. J. ( 2018 ). Embracing scale‐dependence to achieve a deeper understanding of biodiversity and its change across communities . Ecology Letters , 21 ( 11 ), 1737 – 1751 . 10.1111/ele.13151 30182500 Chase , J. M. , McGill , B. J. , Thompson , P. L. , Antão , L. H. , Bates , A. E. , Blowes , S. A. , Dornelas , M. , Gonzalez , A. , Magurran , A. E. , Supp , S. R. , Winter , M. , Bjorkman , A. D. , Bruelheide , H. , Byrnes , J. E. K. , Cabral , J. S. , Elahi , R. , Gomez , C. , Guzman , H. M. , Isbell , F. , … O'Connor , M. ( 2019 ). Species richness change across spatial scales . Oikos , 128 ( 8 ), 1079 – 1091 . 10.1111/oik.05968 Chollett , I. , &amp; Robertson , D. R. ( 2020 ). Comparing biodiversity databases: Greater Caribbean reef fishes as a case study . Fish and Fisheries , 21 ( 6 ), 1195 – 1212 . 10.1111/faf.12497 Clements , F. E. ( 1916 ). Plant succession: An analysis of the development of vegetation . Carnegie Institution of Washington 10.5962/bhl.title.56234 Coltman , N. , Golding , N. , &amp; Verling , E. ( 2008 ). Developing a broadscale predictive EUNIS habitat map for the MESH study area . https://webarchive.nationalarchives.gov.uk/20101014085634/http://www.searchmesh.net/pdf/MESHEUNISmodel.pdf Connolly , S. R. , MacNeil , M. A. , Caley , M. J. , Knowlton , N. , Cripps , E. , Hisano , M. , Thibaut , L. M. , Bhattacharya , B. D. , Benedetti‐Cecchi , L. , Brainard , R. E. , Brandt , A. , Bulleri , F. , Ellingsen , K. E. , Kaiser , S. , Kroncke , I. , Linse , K. , Maggi , E. , O'Hara , T. D. , Plaisance , L. , … Wilson , R. S. ( 2014 ). Commonness and rarity in the marine biosphere . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America , 111 ( 23 ), 8524 – 8529 . 10.1073/pnas.1406664111 24912168 PMC4060690 Cooper , K. M. , &amp; Barry , J. ( 2017 ). A big data approach to macrofaunal baseline assessment, monitoring and sustainable exploitation of the seabed . Scientific Reports , 7 ( 1 ). 10.1038/s41598-017-11377-9 PMC5622093 28963498 Cooper , K. M. , Bolam , S. G. , Downie , A. L. , &amp; Barry , J. ( 2019 ). Biological‐based habitat classification approaches promote cost‐efficient monitoring: An example using seabed assemblages . Journal of Applied Ecology , 56 ( 5 ), 1085 – 1098 . 10.1111/1365-2664.13381 Couce , E. , Engelhard , G. H. , &amp; Schratzberger , M. ( 2020 ). Capturing threshold responses of marine benthos along gradients of natural and anthropogenic change . Journal of Applied Ecology , 00 , 1 – 12 . 10.1111/1365-2664.13604 Couce , E. , Schratzberger , M. , &amp; Engelhard , G. H. ( 2020 ). Reconstructing three decades of total international trawling effort in the North Sea . Earth System Science Data , 12 , 373 – 386 . 10.5194/essd-12-373-2020 Davies , C. E. , Moss , D. , &amp; Hill , M. O. ( 2004 ). EUNIS habitat classification revised 2004 . In Report to: European environment agency‐European topic centre on nature protection and biodiversity . Dickey‐Collas , M. ( 2014 ). Why the complex nature of integrated ecosystem assessments requires a flexible and adaptive approach . ICES Journal of Marine Science , 71 ( 5 ), 1174 – 1182 . 10.1093/icesjms/fsu027 Diesing , M. , Kröger , S. , Parker , R. , Jenkins , C. , Mason , C. , &amp; Weston , K. ( 2017 ). Predicting the standing stock of organic carbon in surface sediments of the North‐West European continental shelf . Biogeochemistry , 135 ( 1–2 ), 183 – 200 . 10.1007/s10533-017-0310-4 32009697 PMC6961524 Dornelas , M. , Antão , L. H. , Moyes , F. , Bates , A. E. , Magurran , A. E. , Adam , D. , Akhmetzhanova , A. A. , Appeltans , W. , Arcos , J. M. , Arnold , H. , Ayyappan , N. , Badihi , G. , Baird , A. H. , Barbosa , M. , Barreto , T. E. , Bässler , C. , Bellgrove , A. , Belmaker , J. , Benedetti‐Cecchi , L. , … Zettler , M. L. ( 2018 ). BioTIME: A database of biodiversity time series for the Anthropocene . Global Ecology and Biogeography , 27 ( 7 ), 760 – 786 . 10.1111/geb.12729 30147447 PMC6099392 Dornelas , M. , Gotelli , N. J. , McGill , B. , Shimadzu , H. , Moyes , F. , Sievers , C. , &amp; Magurran , A. E. ( 2014 ). Assemblage time series reveal biodiversity change but not systematic loss . Science , 344 ( 6181 ), 296 – 299 . 10.1126/science.1248484 24744374 Duineveld , G. C. A. , Künitzer , A. , Niermann , U. , De Wilde , P. A. W. J. , &amp; Gray , J. S. ( 1991 ). The macrobenthos of the north sea . Netherlands Journal of Sea Research , 28 ( 1–2 ), 53 – 65 . 10.1016/0077-7579(91)90004-K Edgar , G. J. , Bates , A. E. , Bird , T. J. , Jones , A. H. , Kininmonth , S. , Stuart‐Smith , R. D. , &amp; Webb , T. J. ( 2016 ). New approaches to marine conservation through the scaling up of ecological data . Annual Review of Marine Science , 8 ( 1 ), 435 – 461 . 10.1146/annurev-marine-122414-033921 26253270 Edwards , M. , Beaugrand , G. , Helaouët , P. , Alheit , J. , &amp; Coombs , S. ( 2013 ). Marine ecosystem response to the Atlantic multidecadal oscillation . PLoS One , 8 ( 2 ). 10.1371/journal.pone.0057212 PMC3584106 23460832 Elith , J. , &amp; Leathwick , J. R. ( 2009 ). Species distribution models: Ecological explanation and prediction across space and time . Annual Review of Ecology, Evolution, and Systematics , 40 ( 1 ), 677 – 697 . 10.1146/annurev.ecolsys.110308.120159 Emmerson , M. C. , &amp; Raffaelli , D. ( 2004 ). Predator‐prey body size, interaction strength and the stability of a real food web . Journal of Animal Ecology , 73 ( 3 ), 399 – 409 . 10.1111/j.0021-8790.2004.00818.x Enfield , D. B. , Mestas‐Nuñez , A. M. , &amp; Trimble , P. J. ( 2001 ). The Atlantic multidecadal oscillation and its relation to rainfall and river flows in the continental U.S . Geophysical Research Letters , 28 ( 10 ), 2077 – 2080 . 10.1029/2000GL012745 Engemann , K. , Enquist , B. J. , Sandel , B. , Boyle , B. , Jørgensen , P. M. , Morueta‐Holme , N. , Peet , R. K. , Violle , C. , &amp; Svenning , J.‐C. ( 2015 ). Limited sampling hampers “big data” estimation of species richness in a tropical biodiversity hotspot . Ecology and Evolution , 5 ( 3 ), 807 – 820 . 10.1002/ece3.1405 25692000 PMC4328781 Foden , J. , Devlin , M. J. , Mills , D. K. , &amp; Malcolm , S. J. ( 2011 ). Searching for undesirable disturbance: An application of the OSPAR eutrophication assessment method to marine waters of England and Wales . Biogeochemistry , 106 ( 2 ), 157 – 175 . 10.1007/s10533-010-9475-9 Gilman , S. E. , Urban , M. C. , Tewksbury , J. , Gilchrist , G. W. , &amp; Holt , R. D. ( 2010 ). A framework for community interactions under climate change . Trends in Ecology &amp; Evolution , 25 ( 6 ), 325 – 331 . 10.1016/j.tree.2010.03.002 20392517 Gleason , H. A. ( 1926 ). The individualistic concept of the plant association . Bulletin of the Torrey Botanical Club , 53 ( 1 ), 7 10.2307/2479933 Grassle , F. ( 2000 ). The Ocean Biogeographic Information System (OBIS): An on‐line, worldwide atlas for accessing, modeling and mapping marine biological data in a multidimensional geographic context . Oceanography , 13 ( 3 ), 5 – 7 . 10.5670/oceanog.2000.01 Guilhaumon , F. , Gimenez , O. , Gaston , K. J. , &amp; Mouillot , D. ( 2008 ). Taxonomic and regional uncertainty in species‐area relationships and the identification of richness hotspots . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America , 105 ( 40 ), 15458 – 15463 . 10.1073/pnas.0803610105 18832179 PMC2563089 Hautmann , M. ( 2014 ). Diversification and diversity partitioning . Paleobiology , 40 ( 2 ), 162 – 176 . 10.1666/13041 Hengl , T. , Nussbaum , M. , Wright , M. N. , Heuvelink , G. B. M. , &amp; Gräler , B. ( 2018 ). Random forest as a generic framework for predictive modeling of spatial and spatio‐temporal variables . PeerJ , 6 ( 8 ). 10.7717/peerj.5518 PMC6119462 30186691 Hiddink , J. G. , Kaiser , M. J. , Sciberras , M. , McConnaughey , R. A. , Mazor , T. , Hilborn , R. , Collie , J. S. , Pitcher , C. R. , Parma , A. M. , Suuronen , P. , Rijnsdorp , A. D. , &amp; Jennings , S. ( 2020 ). Selection of indicators for assessing and managing the impacts of bottom trawling on seabed habitats . Journal of Applied Ecology , 57 ( 7 ), 1199 – 1209 . 10.1111/1365-2664.13617 Hsieh , T. C. , Ma , K. H. , &amp; Chao , A. ( 2014 ). iNEXT: iNterpolation and EXTrapolation for species diversity. R package version 2.0 . http://CRAN.Rproject.org/package=iNEXT . Retrieved from http://chao.stat.nthu.edu.tw/blog/software‐download Hubbell , S. P. ( 2001 ). The Unified Neutral Theory of Biodiversity and Biogeography , Princeton, New Jersey : Princeton University Press . Hurrell , J. W. ( 1995 ). Decadal trends in the North Atlantic oscillation: Regional temperatures and precipitation . Science , 269 ( 5224 ), 676 – 679 . 10.1126/science.269.5224.676 17758812 Isbell , F. , Gonzalez , A. , Loreau , M. , Cowles , J. , Díaz , S. , Hector , A. , Mace , G. M. , Wardle , D. A. , O'Connor , M. I. , Duffy , J. E. , Turnbull , L. A. , Thompson , P. L. , &amp; Larigauderie , A. ( 2017 ). Linking the influence and dependence of people on biodiversity across scales . Nature , 546 ( 7656 ), 65 – 72 . 10.1038/nature22899 28569811 PMC5460751 Johnson , C. N. , Balmford , A. , Brook , B. W. , Buettel , J. C. , Galetti , M. , Guangchun , L. , &amp; Wilmshurst , J. M. ( 2017 ). Biodiversity losses and conservation responses in the Anthropocene . Science , 356 ( 6335 ), 270 – 275 . 10.1126/science.aam9317 28428393 Jones , F. C. ( 2016 ). Cumulative effects assessment: Theoretical underpinnings and big problems . Environmental Reviews , 24 ( 2 ), 187 – 204 . 10.1139/er-2015-0073 Jones , P. D. , Jonsson , T. , &amp; Wheeler , D. ( 1997 ). Extension to the North Atlantic oscillation using early instrumental pressure observations from Gibraltar and south‐west Iceland . International Journal of Climatology , 17 ( 13 ), 1433 – 1450 . 10.1002/(sici)1097-0088(19971115)17:13&lt;1433:aid-joc203&gt;3.0.co;2-p Jost , L. ( 2007 ). Partitioning diversity into independent alpha and beta components . Ecology , 88 ( 10 ), 2427 – 2439 . 10.1890/06-1736.1 18027744 Kay , E. A. , &amp; Palumbi , S. R. ( 1987 ). Endemism and evolution in Hawaiian marine invertebrates . Trends in Ecology &amp; Evolution , 2 ( 7 ), 183 – 186 . 10.1016/0169-5347(87)90017-6 21227847 Kinlan , B. P. , &amp; Gaines , S. D. ( 2003 ). Propagule dispersal in marine and terrestrial environments: A community perspective . Ecology , 84 ( 8 ), 2007 – 2020 . 10.1890/01-0622 Kupschus , S. , Schratzberger , M. , &amp; Righton , D. ( 2016 ). Practical implementation of ecosystem monitoring for the ecosystem approach to management . Journal of Applied Ecology , 53 ( 4 ), 1236 – 1247 . 10.1111/1365-2664.12648 Lawler , J. J. , White , D. , Neilson , R. P. , &amp; Blaustein , A. R. ( 2006 ). Predicting climate‐induced range shifts: Model differences and model reliability . Global Change Biology , 10.1111/j.1365-2486.2006.01191.x Leinster , T. , &amp; Cobbold , C. A. ( 2012 ). Measuring diversity: The importance of species similarity . Ecology , 93 ( 3 ), 477 – 489 . 10.1890/10-2402.1 22624203 Lenhart , H.‐J. , Mills , D. K. , Baretta‐Bekker , H. , van Leeuwen , S. M. , der Molen , J. V. , Baretta , J. W. , Blaas , M. , Desmit , X. , Kühn , W. , Lacroix , G. , Los , H. J. , Ménesguen , A. , Neves , R. , Proctor , R. , Ruardij , P. , Skogen , M. D. , Vanhoutte‐Brunier , A. , Villars , M. T. , &amp; Wakelin , S. L. ( 2010 ). Predicting the consequences of nutrient reduction on the eutrophication status of the North Sea . Journal of Marine Systems , 81 ( 1–2 ), 148 – 170 . 10.1016/j.jmarsys.2009.12.014 Liautaud , K. , van Nes , E. H. , Barbier , M. , Scheffer , M. , &amp; Loreau , M. ( 2019 ). Superorganisms or loose collections of species? A unifying theory of community patterns along environmental gradients . Ecology Letters , 22 ( 8 ), 1243 – 1252 . 10.1111/ele.13289 31134748 PMC6642053 Loh , J. , Green , R. E. , Ricketts , T. , Lamoreux , J. , Jenkins , M. , Kapos , V. , &amp; Randers , J. ( 2005 ). The Living Planet Index: Using species population time series to track trends in biodiversity . Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences , 360 ( 1454 ), 289 – 295 . 10.1098/rstb.2004.1584 PMC1569448 15814346 Madec , G. , &amp; NEMO System Team ( 2008 ). NEMO ocean engine In Scientific Notes of Climate Modelling Center , France : Institut Pierre‐Simon Laplace (IPSL) , No 27, ISSN No. 1288‐1619. Magurran , A. E. , Deacon , A. E. , Moyes , F. , Shimadzu , H. , Dornelas , M. , Phillip , D. A. T. , &amp; Ramnarine , I. W. ( 2018 ). Divergent biodiversity change within ecosystems . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America , 115 ( 8 ), 1843 – 1847 . 10.1073/pnas.1712594115 29440416 PMC5828582 Marchese , C. ( 2015 ). Biodiversity hotspots: A shortcut for a more complicated concept . Global Ecology and Conservation , 3 , 297 – 309 . 10.1016/j.gecco.2014.12.008 McCauley , D. J. , Pinsky , M. L. , Palumbi , S. R. , Estes , J. A. , Joyce , F. H. , &amp; Warner , R. R. ( 2015 ). Marine defaunation: Animal loss in the global ocean . Science , 347 ( 6219 ). 10.1126/science.1255641 25593191 McGill , B. J. ( 2003 ). A test of the unified neutral theory of biodiversity . Nature , 422 ( 6934 ), 881 – 885 . 10.1038/nature01583 12692564 McGill , B. J. , Dornelas , M. , Gotelli , N. J. , &amp; Magurran , A. E. ( 2015 ). Fifteen forms of biodiversity trend in the Anthropocene . Trends in Ecology &amp; Evolution , 30 ( 2 ), 104 – 113 . 10.1016/j.tree.2014.11.006 25542312 McRae , L. , Deinet , S. , &amp; Freeman , R. ( 2017 ). The diversity‐weighted living planet index: Controlling for taxonomic bias in a global biodiversity indicator . PLoS One , 12 ( 1 ). 10.1371/journal.pone.0169156 PMC5207715 28045977 Mitchell , P. J. , Aldridge , J. , &amp; Diesing , M. ( 2019 ). Legacy data: How decades of seabed sampling can produce robust predictions and versatile products . Geosciences , 9 ( 4 ), 1 – 18 . 10.3390/geosciences9040182 Murdoch , P. S. , McHale , M. , &amp; Baron , J. ( 2014 ). Reflections on a vision for integrated research and monitoring after 15 years . Aquatic Geochemistry , 20 ( 2–3 ), 363 – 380 . 10.1007/s10498-013-9222-7 Myers , N. , Mittermeler , R. A. , Mittermeler , C. G. , Da Fonseca , G. A. B. , &amp; Kent , J. ( 2000 ). Biodiversity hotspots for conservation priorities . Nature , 403 ( 6772 ), 853 – 858 . 10.1038/35002501 10706275 Na , L. , &amp; Kiessling , W. ( 2015 ). Diversity partitioning during the Cambrian radiation . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America , 112 ( 15 ), 4702 – 4706 . 10.1073/pnas.1424985112 25825755 PMC4403203 Norman , K. E. , &amp; White , E. ( 2019 ). Hotspot prioritizations show sensitivity to data type . BioRxiv , 685735 , 10.1101/685735 Nye , J. A. , Baker , M. R. , Bell , R. , Kenny , A. , Kilbourne , K. H. , Friedland , K. D. , Martino , E. , Stachura , M. M. , Van Houtan , K. S. , &amp; Wood , R. ( 2014 ). Ecosystem effects of the Atlantic Multidecadal Oscillation . Journal of Marine Systems , 133 , 103 – 116 . 10.1016/j.jmarsys.2013.02.006 OBIS ( 2020 ). Ocean biogeographic information system . Intergovernmental Oceanographic Commission of UNESCO www.iobis.org Olszewski , T. D. ( 2004 ). A unified mathematical framework for the measurement of richness and evenness within and among multiple communities . Oikos , 104 ( 2 ), 377 – 387 . 10.1111/j.0030-1299.2004.12519.x Ottersen , G. , Planque , B. , Belgrano , A. , Post , E. , Reid , P. C. , &amp; Stenseth , N. C. ( 2001 ). Ecological effects of the North Atlantic Oscillation . Oecologia , 128 , 1 – 14 . 10.1007/s004420100655 28547079 Paine , R. T. ( 1992 ). Food‐web analysis through field measurement of per capita interaction strength . Nature , 355 ( 6355 ), 73 – 75 . 10.1038/355073a0 Pimm , S. L. , Jenkins , C. N. , Abell , R. , Brooks , T. M. , Gittleman , J. L. , Joppa , L. N. , Raven , P. H. , Roberts , C. M. , &amp; Sexton , J. O. ( 2014 ). The biodiversity of species and their rates of extinction, distribution, and protection . Science , 344 ( 6187 ). 10.1126/science.1246752 24876501 Price , A. R. G. ( 2002 ). Simultaneous “hotspots” and “coldspots” of marine biodiversity and implications for global conservation . Marine Ecology Progress Series , 241 , 23 – 27 . 10.3354/meps241023 Purvis , A. , Newbold , T. , De Palma , A. , Contu , S. , Hill , S. L. L. , Sanchez‐Ortiz , K. , &amp; Scharlemann , J. P. W. ( 2018 ). Modelling and projecting the response of local terrestrial biodiversity worldwide to land use and related pressures: The PREDICTS project . Advances in Ecological Research , 58 , 201 – 241 . 10.1016/bs.aecr.2017.12.003 R Core Team . ( 2017 ). R: A language and environment for statistical computing . R Foundation for Statistical Computing http://www.R‐project.org/ Rees , H. L. , Pendle , M. A. , Waldock , R. , Limpenny , D. S. , &amp; Boyd , S. E. ( 1999 ). A comparison of benthic biodiversity in the North Sea, English Channel, and Celtic Seas . ICES Journal of Marine Science , 56 ( 2 ), 228 – 246 . 10.1006/jmsc.1998.0438 Renaud , P. E. , Webb , T. J. , Bjørgesæter , A. , Karakassis , I. , Kedra , M. , Kendall , M. A. , Labrune , C. , Lampadariou , N. , Somerfield , P. J. , Wlodarska‐Kowalczuk , M. , Vanden Berghe , E. , Claus , S. , Aleffi , I. F. , Amouroux , J. M. , Bryne , K. H. , Cochrane , S. J. , Dahle , S. , Degraer , S. , Denisenko , S. G. , … Zettler , M. L. ( 2009 ). Continental‐scale patterns in benthic invertebrate diversity: Insights from the MacroBen database . Marine Ecology Progress Series , 382 , 239 – 252 . 10.3354/meps07963 Snelgrove , P. V. R. ( 1999 ). Getting to the bottom of marine biodiversity: Sedimentary habitats . BioScience , 49 ( 2 ), 129 10.2307/1313538 Snelgrove , P. V. R. , Blackburn , T. H. , Hutchings , P. A. , Alongi , D. M. , Grassle , J. F. , Hummel , H. , King , G. , Koike , I. , Lambshead , P. J. D. , Ramsing , N. B. , &amp; Solis‐Weiss , V. , ( 1997 ). The importance of marine sediment biodiversity in ecosystem processes . Ambio , 26 ( 8 ), 578 – 583 . 10.2307/4314672 Somerfield , P. J. , Arvanitidis , C. , Faulwetter , S. , Chatzigeorgiou , G. , Vasileiadou , A. , Amouroux , J. M. , Anisimova , N. , Cochrane , S. J. , Craeymeersch , J. , Dahle , S. , Denisenko , S. , Dounas , K. , Duineveld , G. , Grémare , A. , Heip , C. , Herrmann , M. , Karakassis , I. , Kedra , M. , Kendall , M. A. , … Wlodarska‐Kowalczuk , M. ( 2009 ). Assessing evidence for random assembly of marine benthic communities from regional species pools . Marine Ecology Progress Series , 382 , 279 – 286 . 10.3354/meps07934 Stekhoven , D. J. , &amp; Bühlmann , P. ( 2012 ). Missforest‐Non‐parametric missing value imputation for mixed‐type data . Bioinformatics , 28 ( 1 ), 112 – 118 . 10.1093/bioinformatics/btr597 22039212 Tett , P. , Gowen , R. , Mills , D. , Fernandes , T. , Gilpin , L. , Huxham , M. , Kennington , K. , Read , P. , Service , M. , Wilkinson , M. , &amp; Malcolm , S. ( 2007 ). Defining and detecting undesirable disturbance in the context of marine eutrophication . Marine Pollution Bulletin , 55 ( 1–6 ), 282 – 297 . 10.1016/j.marpolbul.2006.08.028 17011591 Thorson , J. T. , &amp; Barnett , L. A. K. ( 2017 ). Comparing estimates of abundance trends and distribution shifts using single‐ and multispecies models of fishes and biogenic habitat . ICES Journal of Marine Science , 74 ( 5 ), 1311 – 1321 . 10.1093/icesjms/fsw193 Thurstan , R. H. , Brockington , S. , &amp; Roberts , C. M. ( 2010 ). The effects of 118 years of industrial fishing on UK bottom trawl fisheries . Nature Communications , 1 ( 2 ). 10.1038/ncomms1013 20975682 Tuomisto , H. ( 2010 ). A diversity of beta diversities: Straightening up a concept gone awry. Part 1. Defining beta diversity as a function of alpha and gamma diversity . Ecography , 33 ( 1 ), 2 – 22 . 10.1111/j.1600-0587.2009.05880.x van der Sluijs , J. P. , Amaral‐Rogers , V. , Belzunces , L. P. , Bijleveld van Lexmond , M. F. I. J. , Bonmatin , J.‐M. , Chagnon , M. , Downs , C. A. , Furlan , L. , Gibbons , D. W. , Giorio , C. , Girolami , V. , Goulson , D. , Kreutzweiser , D. P. , Krupke , C. , Liess , M. , Long , E. , McField , M. , Mineau , P. , Mitchell , E. A. D. , … Wiemers , M. ( 2015 ). Conclusions of the worldwide integrated assessment on the risks of neonicotinoids and fipronil to biodiversity and ecosystem functioning . Environmental Science and Pollution Research , 22 , 148 – 154 . 10.1007/s11356-014-3229-5 25296936 PMC4284366 Vanden Berghe , E. , Claus , S. , Appeltans , W. , Faulwetter , S. , Arvanitidis , C. , Somerfield , P. J. , Aleffi , I. F. , Amouroux , J. M. , Anisimova , N. , Bachelet , G. , Cochrane , S. J. , Costello , M. J. , Craeymeersch , J. , Dahle , S. , Degraer , S. , Denisenko , S. , Dounas , C. , Duineveld , G. , Emblow , C. , … Heip , C. ( 2009 ). MacroBen integrated database on benthic invertebrates of European continental shelves: A tool for large‐scale analysis across Europe . Marine Ecology Progress Series , 382 , 225 – 238 . 10.3354/meps07826 Vázquez , D. P. , Melián , C. J. , Williams , N. M. , Blüthgen , N. , Krasnov , B. R. , &amp; Poulin , R. ( 2007 ). Species abundance and asymmetric interaction strength in ecological networks . Oikos , 116 ( 7 ), 1120 – 1127 . 10.1111/j.0030-1299.2007.15828.x Vergnon , R. , Dulvy , N. K. , &amp; Freckleton , R. P. ( 2009 ). Niches versus neutrality: Uncovering the drivers of diversity in a species‐rich community . Ecology Letters , 12 ( 10 ), 1079 – 1090 . 10.1111/j.1461-0248.2009.01364.x 19747181 Webb , T. J. , &amp; Mindel , B. L. ( 2015 ). Global patterns of extinction risk in marine and non‐marine systems . Current Biology , 25 ( 4 ), 506 – 511 . 10.1016/j.cub.2014.12.023 25639240 Whittaker , R. H. ( 1960 ). Vegetation of the Siskiyou Mountains, Oregon and California . Ecological Monographs , 30 ( 4 ), 407 10.2307/1948435 Whittaker , R. H. ( 1972 ). Evolution and Measurement of Species Diversity . Taxon , 21 ( 2‐3 ), 213 – 251 . 10.2307/1218190 Witman , J. D. , Etter , R. J. , &amp; Smith , F. ( 2004 ). The relationship between regional and local species diversity in marine benthic communities: A global perspective . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America , 101 ( 44 ), 15664 – 15669 . 10.1073/pnas.0404300101 15501917 PMC524210 Wootton , J. T. ( 1997 ). Estimates and tests of per capita interaction strength: Diet, abundance, and impact of intertidally foraging birds . Ecological Monographs , 67 ( 1 ), 45 – 64 . WoRMS Editorial Board ( 2017 ). World register of marine species . 10.14284/170 ; http://www.marinespecies.org Wright , M. N. , &amp; Ziegler , A. ( 2017 ). ranger: A fast implementation of random forests for high dimensional data in C++ and R . Journal of Statistical Software , 77 ( 1 ), 1 – 17 . 10.18637/jss.v077.i01