3815 pheelsevier Environmental Pollution (Barking, Essex : 1987) Environ Pollut PMC9757913 9757913 9757913 33940341 10.1016/j.envpol.2021.117153 Increased ozone pollution alongside reduced nitrogen dioxide concentrations during Vienna’s first COVID-19 lockdown: Significance for air quality management ☆ Brancher Marlon 1 1 WG Environmental Health, Department of Biomedical Sciences, University of Veterinary Medicine Vienna, Veterinärplatz 1, A-1210, Vienna, Austria 15 4 2021 284 117153 117153 19 12 2022 © 2021 The Author Since January 2020 Elsevier has created a COVID-19 resource centre with free information in English and Mandarin on the novel coronavirus COVID-19. The COVID-19 resource centre is hosted on Elsevier Connect, the company's public news and information website. Elsevier hereby grants permission to make all its COVID-19-related research that is available on the COVID-19 resource centre - including this research content - immediately available in PubMed Central and other publicly funded repositories, such as the WHO COVID database with rights for unrestricted research re-use and analyses in any form or by any means with acknowledgement of the original source. These permissions are granted for free by Elsevier for as long as the COVID-19 resource centre remains active. Abstract Background Lockdowns amid the COVID-19 pandemic have offered a real-world opportunity to better understand air quality responses to previously unseen anthropogenic emission reductions. Methods and main objective This work examines the impact of Vienna’s first lockdown on ground-level concentrations of nitrogen dioxide (NO 2 ), ozone (O 3 ) and total oxidant (O x ). The analysis runs over January to September 2020 and considers business as usual scenarios created with machine learning models to provide a baseline for robustly diagnosing lockdown-related air quality changes. Models were also developed to normalise the air pollutant time series, enabling facilitated intervention assessment. Core findings NO 2 concentrations were on average −20.1% [13.7–30.4%] lower during the lockdown. However, this benefit was offset by amplified O 3 pollution of +8.5% [3.7–11.0%] in the same period. The consistency in the direction of change indicates that the NO 2 reductions and O 3 increases were ubiquitous over Vienna. O x concentrations increased slightly by +4.3% [1.8–6.4%], suggesting that a significant part of the drops in NO 2 was compensated by gains in O 3 . Accordingly, 82% of lockdown days with lowered NO 2 were accompanied by 81% of days with amplified O 3 . The recovery shapes of the pollutant concentrations were depicted and discussed. The business as usual-related outcomes were broadly consistent with the patterns outlined by the normalised time series. These findings allowed to argue further that the detected changes in air quality were of anthropogenic and not of meteorological reason. Pollutant changes on the machine learning baseline revealed that the impact of the lockdown on urban air quality were lower than the raw measurements show. Besides, measured traffic drops in major Austrian roads were more significant for light-duty than for heavy-duty vehicles. It was also noted that the use of mobility reports based on cell phone movement as activity data can overestimate the reduction of emissions for the road transport sector, particularly for heavy-duty vehicles. As heavy-duty vehicles can make up a large fraction of the fleet emissions of nitrogen oxides, the change in the volume of these vehicles on the roads may be the main driver to explain the change in NO 2 concentrations. Interpretation and implications A probable future with emissions of volatile organic compounds (VOCs) dropping slower than emissions of nitrogen oxides could risk worsened urban O 3 pollution under a VOC-limited photochemical regime. More holistic policies will be needed to achieve improved air quality levels across different regions and criteria pollutants. Keywords: COVID-19 lockdown, Air quality data, Atmospheric composition, Meteorology, Machine learning Graphical abstract Image 1 status released display-pdf yes is-in-collection-domain yes is-olf no is-manuscript no is-preprint no is-journal-matter no is-scanned no is-retracted no Received 2021 Jan 26; Revised 2021 Mar 19; Accepted 2021 Apr 13; Issue date 2021 Sep 1. 1. Introduction The outbreak of the Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19) pandemic created unprecedented societal impacts worldwide. To lessen the virus spread, governments announced drastic non-pharmaceutical measures collectively referred to as lockdowns. In most European countries, the first series of lockdowns were imposed in early spring 2020. The restrictions led to an unseen drop in mobility and economic activities with associated sector-dependent reductions of anthropogenic air emissions ( Evangeliou et al., 2021 ; Forster et al., 2020 ; Guevara et al., 2021 ; Le Quéré et al., 2020 ). For instance, less road traffic in cities will decrease the emissions of nitrogen oxides ( NO x ≡ NO + NO 2 ), a by-product of incomplete combustion of fossil fuels. Given the sources and short atmospheric lifetime of NO x ( Laughner and Cohen, 2019 ), their ambient concentrations are often higher close to busy streets in populated urban centres. Guidelines and limit values are typically enforced for nitrogen dioxide (NO 2 ), making it a relevant pollutant to study the impact of COVID-19 lockdowns on air quality. However, quantifying the air quality response from emission changes as a result of particular events such as COVID-19 lockdowns is not trivial due to the multifaceted nature of the atmosphere, and NO 2 is one regulated air pollutant of many. Ozone (O3) in the troposphere is a greenhouse gas, a potent oxidant, and a harmful air pollutant. As a secondary pollutant, O 3 is produced or destructed in complex photochemical reactions of CO, CH 4 and other volatile organic compounds (VOCs) in the presence of NO x ( Archibald et al., 2020 ; Monks et al., 2015 ; Sillman, 1999 ). These precursors have anthropogenic and natural sources ( Lu et al., 2019 ). Entrainment of O 3 from the stratosphere can also influence the distribution of surface O 3 ( Collins et al., 2003 ). A common feature of O 3 chemistry is the highly non-linear dependence on its precursors. Because this chemistry has parallels with the input of NO x and VOCs, it opens prospects to develop emission reduction policies ( Seinfeld and Pandis, 2006 ). It is generally specified that under environments where VOC/NO x ratios are high (low NO x ), the regime is NO x -limited. Consequently, more NO x will result in more O 3 . This regime is seen more often in rural and suburban areas. For low VOC/NO x ratios (high NO x ), the regime is NO x -saturated or VOC-limited. This is typically observed in urban areas, where more NO x does not produce more O 3 but the contrary ( Kroll et al., 2020 ). The phenomenon, termed titration, means that reducing NO x reduces the amount of O 3 being destructed via reaction with NO, and this essentially increases O 3 ( Monks et al., 2015 ). Titration is a root cause of the weekend effect ( de Foy et al., 2020 ; Sicard et al., 2020b ), with O 3 levels increasing on weekends resulting from less road traffic and associated NO x emissions. This fundamental chemistry could thus clarify observed increases in urban O 3 during lockdowns. However, the magnitude and sign of the O 3 change are not that straightforward. Accordingly, previous studies have reported mainly gains in urban areas, but also declines and no distinguishable change in O 3 levels during lockdowns ( Adams, 2020 ; Dantas et al., 2020 ; Grange et al., 2021 ; Keller et al., 2021 ; Lovri et al., 2021 ; Luo et al., 2020 ; Miyazaki et al., 2020 ; Ordóñez et al., 2020 ; Sicard et al., 2020a ; Siciliano et al., 2020 ; Singh et al., 2020 ; Soni et al., 2021 ). Besides NOx levels, this conclusion hinges on additional physical and chemical processes, such as the origin, ageing, amount and reactivity of the VOCs sources, the influence of biogenic VOCs, long-range transport of O 3 , oxidant levels, on top of local weather conditions ( Archibald et al., 2020 ; Kroll et al., 2020 ; Monks et al., 2015 ; Sillman, 1999 ; Stohl and Kromp-Kolb, 1994 ; Targino et al., 2019 ). Meteorological conditions and chemistry play a central role in dictating air quality levels. These factors can confound the quantification of pollutant changes during lockdowns. The influence of confounders has been acknowledged, but relatively fewer studies have included this issue in the analysis ( Grange et al., 2021 ; Jephcote et al., 2021 ; Keller et al., 2021 ; Lovri et al., 2021 ; Venter et al., 2020 ). More research is needed to increase our knowledge of the impacts of COVID-19 lockdowns on air quality, particularly by dealing with confounders critically in this kind of analysis. Based on an ensemble of methods linking measurements and modelling, this work demonstrates a thorough analysis of the impact of the first COVID-19 lockdown on the air quality in Vienna, Austria. The focus is on ambient NO 2 and O 3 at ground level. Also, O x ≡ NO 2 + O 3 has been added to the analysis to gain insights into the atmospheric oxidative capacity during the lockdown. The analysis shows how air quality responded until the end of September 2020, thereby covering a more extended period than most previous studies. This work has four specific objectives. First , changes in road transportation are explored based on three different datasets to better understand potential changes in air quality and to provide insights for mobility-based emission estimations. Second , the importance of taking meteorology into account for more reliable lockdown-related air quality changes is shown, particularly for the present case of an urban boundary layer. Third , to account for the influence of meteorological variability itself and other time features, machine learning models are built to produce business as usual (BAU) and normalised pollutant time series. Fourth , this work investigates the potential bias when air quality changes are directly quantified from the pollutant measurements. 2. Methods 2.1. Study setting Cities are at the heart of air quality management. By 2050, about two-thirds of the world’s population is projected to be living in urban areas ( United Nations, 2019 ). Vienna, the capital of Austria, had a population of 1,991,191 as of January 2020. The city is divided into 23 districts over a total area of 414.9 km 2 of which 50% are green spaces and water bodies, 36% built-up areas and 14% traffic areas. The highest elevation is Hermannskogel (543 m) and the lowest Lobau (151 m). The city does not accommodate major industries, except for an oil refinery in the South-east (SE). The total length of streets is 2,833 km with 714,960 private motor vehicles (including 3,853 electric cars). With a length of almost 18 km, the Viennese SE Tangent (A23 Südosttangente ) is the shortest highway in Austria, but the busiest. The modal split share in Vienna is 38%, 30%, 25% and 7% for public transport, walking, driving and cycling, respectively. The car ownership rate is 37 cars/100 inhabitants, the lowest of the Austrian provincial capital cities ( Statistics Vienna, 2020 ). 2.2. Data consideration and key periods under scrutiny This work was designed based on the immediacy and availability of data, implying that only publicly available datasets have been considered. The major attention period of the first COVID-19 lockdown in Austria was from March 16 to April 13, 2020, inclusively ( Pollak et al., 2020 ). Hereafter the lockdown imposed in this period is referred to as LOCK-2020. The identical period in the past five years is referred to as HIST-2015-2019. 2.3. Road transport data Changes in road transport were explored based on three mobility datasets. First, monthly average daily traffic (MADT) counts were obtained from the ASFINAG | Autobahnen-und Schnellstraßen-Finanzierungs-Aktiengesellschaft ’s motorway and expressway network for January to September in 2019 and 2020. This network includes currently about 270 measuring locations over Austria based on overhead (ultrasonic and passive infrared sensors) and inductive-loop detectors ( ASFINAG, 2021 ). MADT data representing the number of vehicles that travel past (in both directions) a measuring location on all weekdays (Monday–Sunday), including bank holidays, were selected. Percentage changes on 2019 MADT data were calculated for individual months and summarised by vehicle category for the city and national levels. Two vehicle categories were considered: heavy-duty vehicles (HDV) whose maximum authorised overall weight is more than 3,500 kg and light-duty vehicles (LDV) whose weight is less than or equal to 3,500 kg. The HDV category includes buses, trucks and articulated vehicles. The LDV category embraces motorcycles, cars and delivery vans. Second, Apple’s movement data were retrieved ( Apple, 2021 ). Apple data originated from navigation requests for directions in Apple Maps. These data represent daily changes in the volume of people driving, walking or taking public transit corresponding to a baseline (January 13, 2020). Apple data did not consider day of the week influences. Of the three categories, driving was selected for the analysis. Third, Google’s movement data were used ( Google, 2021 ). Google data were provided in six categories of which one was of interest: transit stations. These data represent how daily visits or length of stay at different places like public transport hubs for transit stations change compared to seven baseline days. Google selected a baseline day as the median value during the five-week period from January 3 to February 6, 2020 for the corresponding day of the week. 2.4. Air quality measurements The analysis was built on validated and up-to-date hourly measurements of O 3 and NO 2 from seventeen monitors deployed across Vienna for the period between 2015 and September 30, 2020. Of these monitors, sixteen measure NO 2 and five measure O 3 . A third pollutant was included as O x ≡ NO 2 + O 3 . O x levels were calculated for four monitors. Detailed information on the individual monitors and measurement methods can be found elsewhere ( Umweltschutzabteilung der Stadt Wien, 2020 ). Briefly, chemiluminescence and ultraviolet absorption are the methods used for NO 2 and O 3 measurements, respectively. Municipal Department 22 ( https://www.wien.gv.at/umwelt/luft/index.html ) provided air quality data. Up-to-date air quality data are unvalidated and subject to revision. As an attempt to assure data quality, the up-to-date data were screened for issues. These included frequent missing values (more than 10%), long lengths of gaps (more than 24 data points), unrealistic high values appearing abruptly (manual inspection of the time series), negative measurements, and repetitive sequences of measurements (in chunks of more than 6 data points); however, no prominent issues have been identified in the up-to-date data used herein. Figs. S1-S3 breakdown the availability of measurements by pollutant and monitor. The Viennese air quality network has been designed to capture different exposure conditions, representing varying degrees of urbanisation. It comprises monitors at urban and suburban locations (area type). These locations are subdivided into background, traffic and industrial (station type). A combination of area type and station type (e.g., urban traffic) is hereafter referred to as environment. The monitors comprise five environments: urban traffic, urban background, suburban traffic, suburban industrial and suburban background. 2.5. Meteorological measurements Initially, seven surface meteorological stations from the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration Integrated Surface Database (NOAA/ISD, https://www.ncdc.noaa.gov/isd ) were identified. The NOAA/ISD meteorological data were accessed using the worldmet R package ( Carslaw, 2020 ). As for the air quality measurements, the period between 2015 and September 30, 2020 was considered. The temporal resolution of the meteorological data is hourly. After screen checks, four of those stations were kept. Three stations (known as Groβ-Enzersdorf, Donaufeld and Mariabrunn) were eliminated because of data gaps over LOCK-2020. For the monitor located at Hermannskogel, co-located meteorological measurements (data made available by Municipal Department 22) were considered. This was due to its more isolated position (488 m high) and the absence of an adjacent station in the NOAA/ISD database. Finally, five stations were selected. Fig. 1 illustrates the positions of the five meteorological stations and the seventeen air quality monitors in Vienna. Fig. 1 Locations of the air quality monitors and meteorological stations used in this study. Outer line represents the boundary of Vienna and inner lines represent the city’s districts. (For interpretation of the references to colour in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the Web version of this article) Fig. 1 A prerequisite for developing this work was to propose an easily generalisable methodological design. With this in mind, the following routinely available and directly measured surface variables were selected: wind speed w s (m s −1 ), wind direction w d (°), air temperature T air (°C), atmospheric pressure P atm (mb) and relative humidity RH (%). These variables were measured at all five meteorological stations. Based on representativeness, a meteorological station was designated for each air quality monitor ( Table S1 ), and the meteorological and air pollutant datasets were paired under a mutual time frame (Coordinated Universal Time was used). 2.6. Business as usual modelling Business as usual (BAU) scenarios in the form of pollutant time series were created using the random forest machine learning algorithm ( Breiman, 2001 ). A total of 25 random forest models were grown to explain hourly-averaged concentrations per pollutant per monitor. This was done by feeding into the algorithm the meteorological variables previously described, besides time features which act as proxies for emissions and seasonality. The latter comprised Unix date t trend (the trend term), Julian day t jd , day of week t week , and hour of day t hour . The models can be written in terms of their nine common explanatory variables as follows Eq. 1 [ C ¯ ] ∼ w s + w d + T a i r + P a t m + R H + t t r e n d + t j d + t w e e k + t h o u r , where [ C ¯ ] is the hourly-averaged concentration of the air pollutant of interest. When developing the models, the subsequent hyper-parameters were kept constant: node splitting with three variables, minimum node size of five and 300 trees ( Grange et al., 2018 ). A training-testing splitting proportion of 70:30 was used. Several tuning tests were conducted, but the overall performance was steady with respect to the hyper-parameters selection and splitting fraction. Missing values of w s and pollutant concentrations were removed prior to training. The models were grown from January 1, 2015 to February 15, 2020. From February 16 to September 30, 2020, the models predicted air pollutant concentrations forced by the meteorological conditions that were actually measured during this period. This strategy was implemented to ( i ) investigate air quality changes prior to and long after LOCK-2020 and ( ii ) verify the models’ predictive skill to reproduce the pollutant measurements from February 16 to February 29, 2020 . This second step is referred to as the verification phase. The duration of the verification phase was devised considering that the first two COVID-19 cases in Austria had been confirmed on February 25, 2020 ( Pollak et al., 2020 ). Therefore, it was assumed no significant perturbations in anthropogenic emissions during the verification phase. The analysis of the road traffic patterns has proved valuable to support this assumption. Subsequently, the model-specific mean bias, M B = 1 n ∑ i = 1 n P i − O i , for the verification phase was used to calibrate the predictions. In the MB equation, O i is the i t h observed value and P i is the i t h predicted value for a total of n data points. As the models were developed based on historical data prior to LOCK-2020, they are blind concerning the drastic perturbations in emissions caused by the COVID-19 crisis. As such, this approach considers that (local) emission sources would have remained operating normally under the observed meteorology. In other words, it simulates what would have been expected in the absence of COVID-19. BAU-related results were expressed as concentration deltas (Δ): the difference between the measurements and the predictions. The modelling was conducted using the rmweather R package ( Grange et al., 2018 ; Grange and Carslaw, 2019 ), which has underlying it the ranger R package ( Wright and Ziegler, 2017 ). 2.7. Intervention assessment The intrinsic variability in air pollutant time series complicates the detection of interventions and trends. In order to detach the contribution of influencing factors on measured pollutant concentrations, a normalisation technique was used ( Grange and Carslaw, 2019 ). In addition to work in a predictive mode (for pollutant concentration forecasting), random forest models can also be used to diminish the effect of the explanatory variables on the dependent variable [ C ¯ ]. This is done through sampling and predicting. To this end, another 25 random forest models were grown per pollutant per monitor following the previously described procedure ( Sec. 2.6 ). The only difference was that these models were developed from 2015 to September 30, 2020 so that the MB calibration was not applicable here. The explanatory variables, excluding t trend , were randomly sampled with replacement 300 times from the whole dataset for every time step. A model then predicts [ C ¯ ] based on these inputs and returns the 300 predictions for each time step (hourly basis). The mean of the predictions for each hour was computed, and this forms the normalised pollutant time series that can be used for further exploration. 2.8. Data analysis Hourly air pollutant concentrations were used to estimate mean changes (absolute and relative percentage). Changes in air quality were calculated for pollutants and monitors individually and by performing aggregations. A left-centred 7-day moving average was applied to highlight prevalent trends (longer-term) by smoothing out potentially large day-to-day fluctuations (shorter-term). The Mann-Whitney U test, a non-parametric method for equality of population medians of two independent samples, was used at a significance level of 0.01. Data analysis was performed in R using the openair ( Carslaw and Ropkins, 2012 ) and tidyverse ( Wickham et al., 2019 ) packages. 3. Results and discussion 3.1. Road traffic patterns The month-by-month analysis of the MADT data indicates that the maximum reduction in road transport of −43% was reached in April 2020 in Vienna. Broken down by vehicle category, drops of −44% in LDV and −21% in HDV counts were found ( Fig. 2 , left panel). At the Austrian level, a maximum reduction in MADT of about −57% was also found in April 2020, with drops of −61% in LDV and −25% in HDV counts. In February 2020, an increase in MADT counts of +1% was observed for Vienna, with a +2% increase in LDV and a −2% drop in HDV. For Austria in February 2020, a decline in MADT counts of −1% was detected, with −0.8% and −3% drops in LDV and HDV, respectively. Thus, road traffic in Austria and Vienna until February 2020 did not undergo significant disruptions on major roads. These outcomes support calibrating the predictions of the BAU models based on the verification phase (February 16 to February 29, 2020). Furthermore, air traffic in Austrian airports showed akin trends to those of the road transport sector. An increase in passenger numbers of +7% was reported for February 2020, followed by drops of −65%, −100% and −99% in March, April and May 2020, respectively, compared with the same months in 2019 ( STATISTIK AUSTRIA, 2020 ). Over the 9 months in 2020 (January–September 2020), MADT counts were down by −16% for Vienna and −21% for Austria relative to the same period in the previous year. These figures break down to −17% and −22% along with −5% and −8% drops in LDV and HDV counts for Vienna and Austria, respectively ( Fig. 2 , left panel). In view of these results, the Viennese MADT patterns were equivalent to those at the national level on major roads, but higher mean reductions in road traffic were generally observed for the country. Fig. 2 Mobility changes (%) in the road transport sector for Vienna and Austria. Left : monthly-average daily traffic MADT counts for LDV and HDV. Right : 7-day rolling mean on the Google transit data and Apple driving data. See Methods for details on the baselines from which the percentage changes have been derived. (For interpretation of the references to colour in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the Web version of this article) Fig. 2 The changes in MADT counts also pinpoint that HDV were much less affected by the pandemic than LDV. This agrees with a previous study that has considered the same MADT metric for major roads in England ( Jephcote et al., 2021 ). The difference between the two vehicles categories can be explained mainly because the HDV supported the shipment of goods and products during the lockdown ( Guevara et al., 2021 ). After the peak in road traffic reductions in April 2020, a recovery in road traffic flows were observed in May and June 2020 for both vehicle categories. However, normal levels were not observed by the summer of 2020 compared with previous years’ baseline. In particular for HDV, the levels were close to normal in June 2020 and were in fact found to occur first in September 2020 ( Fig. 2 , left panel). Both Google transit and Apple driving data ( Fig. 2 , right panel) did not reflect well the HDV’s activity on major Austrian roads over January–September 2020 ( Fig. 2 , left panel). Overall, the Google transit data appears to reflect the LDV’s activity more closely. A similar outcome for a shorter period (2 months over February–April 2020) has been found for Spain/Barcelona ( Guevara et al., 2021 ). Using Google transit data to estimate emission reductions, one assumes that mobility trends in public transport hubs can be taken as a proxy for trends in road traffic emissions ( Guevara et al., 2021 ). Taken together, the present results support that this assumption is more appropriate for lighter vehicles than for heavier vehicles. Still, for both vehicle categories, the use of both Google transit and Apple driving data can pottentially overestimate the impact of the COVID-19 restrictions on road traffic emissions when compared with the changes in MADT counts. Dedicated studies will be required to resolve the identified issues to achieve improved emission estimates based on cell phone movement data. Anticipated gaps include differences in methodologies to derive the changes in mobility based on movement trends (e.g., different baseline periods) and representativeness of such trends. Here, Pearson’s correlations ( r ) between the Apple driving data and Google transit data were 0.80 (p &lt; 0.01) and 0.79 (p &lt; 0.01) for Vienna and Austria, respectively. Such high correlations have also been noted during February–June 2020 for worldwide cities ( Forster et al., 2020 ). However, it is clear from Fig. 2 (right panel) that there were marked divergences between Apple driving data with Google transit data over the summer months for both Vienna and Austria. The reason for this discrepancy is uncertain, but it may be that the Apple driving data is reflecting the behaviour of a particular type of travel pattern. For the road traffic sector, emission reduction factors have been derived by using bottom-up approaches based on activity indicators such as cell phone movement data ( Guevara et al., 2021 ; Menut et al., 2020 ). The problem of quantifying primary emissions as a result of COVID-19 lockdowns has serious implications for atmospheric modelling. The here-obtained insights by comparing mobility changes in road traffic using three distinct datasets have the potential to contribute to making progress in this regard. 3.2. Meteorological situation Considering the meteorological situation is crucial to better understand air quality changes due to COVID-19 lockdowns. Accordingly, wind roses were produced for the LOCK-2020 and HIST-2015-2019 periods, besides the remaining data outside these periods from 2015 to September 30, 2020 ( Fig. 3 ). Exposed are plots for the five selected meteorological stations, covering a good geographical area across Vienna. Wind roses were also produced for complete years in the 2015–2019 period ( Fig. S4 ). First, there are some differences between the wind roses, which are due to the location of the stations. Vienna is mostly flat from South (S) to East (E) areas. However, the city is circumscribed from South-west (SW) to North-west (NW) by the moderate slopes of the Alpine foothills ( Wienerwald ). Hence, the terrain becomes hilly at these parts, influencing the wind field. The longer-term wind roses demonstrate the city’s typical airflow patterns. These are manifested by two dominant directions which are accompanied by higher speeds ( Fig. 3 , right panels and Fig. S4 ). The prevailing winds blow from West (W) to NW and from SE. The former has on average higher w s than the latter. SE winds are more recurrently observed with fair weather (anticyclonic conditions). Contrary, W and NW winds are more connected to cloudy or rainy periods ( Brancher et al., 2019a ; 2019b ). Moreover, SE winds on hilltops have a higher frequency than elsewhere, and there the highest w s are observed. In the city centre, the w s is reduced because of enhanced drag caused by a higher surface roughness length of the urban canopy layer. Also, not only T air is increased (urban heat island), but RH (urban dry island) is typically reduced in the city centre. Fig. 3 Wind roses for the five selected meteorological stations and different periods (see text for the definition of the periods). The annotations in green show mean wind speeds and calm wind frequencies of each period. Calm winds were defined as having hourly speeds &lt;0.5 m s −1 . The radial scale denotes the frequency of counts by wind direction sector. (For interpretation of the references to colour in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the Web version of this article) Fig. 3 Second, lower w s were experienced for all five stations during LOCK-2020 relative to their preceding 5-year means for the same period, i.e. HIST-2015-2019. Alterations in w d can be seen as well, such as more frequent flows from the North-northwest (NNW) and North (N) sectors ( Fig. 3 , central panels). The Austrian Weather Service (ZAMG) has reported a mild, sunny and mostly dry March 2020 in Austria. The reported T air , precipitation and sunshine duration anomalies (1981–2010 climatology) were respectively +1.5 °C, −53% and +39% for Vienna. However, only the first two thirds of March 2020 were warmer than average. The LOCK-2020 period fits within the last third, and this was slightly colder due to the advance of polar cold air ( ZAMG, 2020a ). Furthermore, ZAMG has reported a truly warm, dry and sunny April 2020. The T air , precipitation and sunshine duration anomalies were respectively +1.7 °C, −83% and +61% for Vienna. However, the cold front persisted until the first days of April 2020. The above-average T air began from around April 5, 2020 ( ZAMG, 2020b ). When comparing LOCK-2020 against HIST-2015-2019 for the five selected stations, average differences of −0.7 °C, −0.7 m s −1 and +16% for T air , w s and RH were detected, respectively. This shows that whereas the LOCK-2020 period shares common features with March and April 2020, it had its own meteorological conditions. Thus, care is called for when comparing identical lockdown periods. Even after reducing the variability by averaging over five previous years, the meteorological conditions between them can be dissimilar. It should be now straightforward to picture that meteorology is an exponentially growing issue for COVID-19 studies that have estimated air quality changes based on different lockdown periods. 3.3. Business as usual scenarios 3.3.1. Predictive performance The random forest models’ skill was evaluated for hourly data during the training/development phase (January 1, 2015–February 15, 2020) and verification phase (February 16—February 29, 2020). Tables S2—S4 dissects the performance summaries. The models were found to explain an adequate amount of the variation in the pollutant concentrations. For example, during the training/development phase, the models had r ranging from 0.82 to 0.91 for NO 2 , from 0.93 to 0.95 for O 3 , and from 0.95 to 0.96 for O x . During the verification phase, there was a general reduction in performance, with the models showing r from 0.68–0.87 for NO 2 , 0.54–0.82 for O 3 , and 0.56–0.81 for O x . Overall, the models’ performance can be considered very satisfactory for hourly predictions, similar to up-to-date works ( Font et al., 2020 ; Grange and Carslaw, 2019 ; Vu et al., 2019 ; Wang et al., 2020 ). Compared with deterministic, process-driven atmospheric chemistry models, the random forest models showed equivalent performance for the present application at a relatively lower computational cost ( Menut et al., 2020 ). It should be noted that the models struggled to reproduce the tails of the distributions. This is not a concern because herein mean air quality changes were examined, and the mean is known to be more robust than high or lower percentiles. Furthermore, the modelling workflow entails meteorological data. This work implemented a simple procedure to achieve models with adequate performance without the need for more sophisticated predictors. As such, the models are a good compromise between simplicity and predictive power. Instead of a long list of predictors, we paid more attention to selecting meteorological data with the potential to better describe smaller-scale air pollution variations in the urban area. Many studies select a ’regional’ meteorological dataset (usually taken from a nearby airport station) to match air quality monitors in cities. The selection of representative surface meteorological stations is anticipated to be even more influential for complex terrain applications, as recently shown for a case in the Italian Alps ( Falocchi et al., 2021 ). The most important explanatory variables to predict hourly concentrations of NO 2 , O 3 and O x in Vienna were monitor dependent. On average, the importance for the NO 2 models was given in the following ascending order: w s , w d , t hour , t jd , T air , RH, t week , t trend and P atm ; for the O 3 models as: RH, T air , t jd , w s , t trend , w d , t hour , P atm and t week ; and for the O x models in this manner: RH, T air , t jd , t trend , w s , w d , t hour , P atm and t week . The variables’ importance agrees well with the chemical and physical processes expected to drive the dynamics of these pollutants ( Jacob and Winner, 2009 ), thereby demonstrating the random forest models’ interpretability nature. It is a universal observational feature that elevated O 3 concentrations are strongly correlated with T air in polluted regions ( Jacob and Winner, 2009 ). This is expected to be the case here too; however, the O 3 models suggest that RH is, on average, more important than T air . Gaining insights into the processes that drive pollutant concentrations is crucial, particularly under a changing climate with regional differences ( Von Schneidemesser et al., 2015 ). Consequently, these results on their own could be valuable to help better understand the sensitivity of O 3 pollution to meteorology in future studies. 3.3.2. Mean air quality changes The NO 2 observations were consistently lower than the BAU predictions ( Fig. 4 ). A mean decrease in NO 2 concentrations of −4.9 μg m −3 during the 29 days of LOCK-2020 was found at the city level. This equated to a mean percentage change of −20.1%. Keller et al. (2021) estimated monthly mean NO 2 changes for worldwide cities using machine learning (gradient boosting) coupled with the GEOS-CF model and mentioned some results for Vienna. They have reported drops in NO 2 concentrations in March and April 2020 of −20.6% and −26.2%, respectively. These monthly figures are not based on the specific lockdown period considered herein (LOCK-2020), but they align well with the present results. Fig. 4 Daily mean of NO 2 concentration deltas Δ. The study period runs between February 16 and September 30, 2020. The deltas represent the differences between the measured pollutant concentrations and the business as usual predictions. Solid grey lines are 7-day rolling means of the concentration deltas. Dashed vertical lines indicate the LOCK-2020 period. Fig. 4 NO 2 concentrations were reduced at all monitors, ranging from −1.4 to −12.7 μg m −3 or from −13.7 to 30.4%. The urban traffic Hietzinger Kai monitor showed the largest mean decrease (−12.7 μg m −3 or −30.4%) followed by other two urban traffic monitors, Gaudenzdorf (−7.2 μg m −3 or −22.8%) and A23-Wehlistraße (−7.0 μg m −3 or −21.8%). Across the network, the lowest NO 2 concentrations typically occur at Hermannskogel, a suburban background monitor located on the hilltop of a wooded area (Wienerwald). The mean reduction in NO 2 concentrations was −1.8 μg m −3 or −21.4% at Hermannskogel. This result shows that the drops in NO x emissions from local sources in the urban core was strong enough to influence NO 2 concentrations at this monitor. Regarding NO 2 aggregations by environment, the influence of land use characteristics on the local spatial variations in NO 2 concentrations has been detected. For instance, higher reductions in NO 2 concentrations were seen at urban traffic (−6.4 μg m −3 or −21.1%, n = 8) than at urban background (−4.1 μg m −3 or −18.5%, n = 3) and suburban background monitors (−1.7 μg m −3 or −15.9%, n = 3). These results were expected because of two main factors related to NO 2 pollution. First, NO 2 is a locally sensitive gas as it has a short atmospheric lifetime ( Laughner and Cohen, 2019 ), meaning that it is not transported to regions far downwind of the emission sources. Second, NO x emissions mainly come from fossil fuel combustion, especially in urban areas. Thus, NO 2 concentrations responded to declines in local NO x emissions promptly as road transportation is the major emission source. By providing a quantitative assessment of the magnitude of this response, this work demonstrates how sensitive NO 2 pollution can be to future policy changes. To contextualise this point further, we can refer to the work of Grange et al. (2021) . This work reported mean trends of NO 2 between 2010 and 2019 for major European urban areas of −1.44 μg m −3 y −1 at urban traffic and −0.72 μg m −3 y −1 at urban background environments. Assuming these concentration trends as a reference point for Vienna, the here-reported mean reductions due to the LOCK-2020 restrictions would indicate 4.4 and 5.7 years of sustained efforts to reduce NO 2 concentrations at those environments, respectively. For Hietzinger Kai, the mean reduction in NO 2 found during the lockdown would be equivalent to 8.8 years of continuous decline in ambient concentrations. Negative daily NO 2 concentration Δ were found for 82% of the lockdown days. Two of the monitors (Hietzinger Kai and Gaudenzdorf) had only one day with positive daily NO 2 concentration Δ, stressing the clear signature of the COVID-19 pandemic on the NO 2 concentrations. The AKH monitor showed the lowest occurrence frequency of negative daily concentration Δ (69%) and one of the lowest reductions (−14.2%) in NO 2 . This monitor is located nearby one of the largest hospitals in Europe, so it is reasonable to assume fewer reductions in road traffic around this hospital during LOCK-2020. The largest departures of the NO 2 observed concentrations from the BAU forecasts generally occurred in early April 2020 (the exception was Hietzinger Kai, see Fig. 4 ). The return to normality (RTN) shapes of the NO 2 concentrations were more site-specific with some monitors recovering to BAU levels immediately after the lockdown (e.g., Hermannskogel, Lobau), in early May (e.g., Belgradplatz, Gaudenzdorf, Stephansplatz) or in late September 2020 (e.g., Hietzinger Kai, Hohe Warte). Altogether, the NO 2 RTN shapes, in particular at urban traffic environments, have strong similarities with the road transportation patterns shown in Fig. 2 . In addition, decreases in NO 2 concentrations were found since early March 2020. This result indicates alterations in emissions effectively before LOCK-2020, which is again supported by the road traffic patterns for this period ( Sec. 3.1 ). This is of significance for determining emission reduction factors in future studies. In follow-up research, it could also justify the definition of lockdown periods based on a statistical framework ( Ropkins and Tate, 2021 ), contrary to static periods defined by official lockdown dates. For O 3 , the opposite behaviour to NO 2 has been found. There were clear increases in O 3 concentrations during LOCK-2020, as indicated by the observations being mostly greater than the counterfactual predictions during this period ( Fig. 5 ). At the city level, O 3 concentrations increased by +5.2 μg m −3 or +8.5% on average. This relative change is greater than the monthly mean changes in March and April 2020 of respectively +5.6% and +3.9% given for Vienna ( Keller et al., 2021 ). However, estimates of O 3 changes are very sensitive to the lockdown window (see Fig. 5 ). Fig. 5 Same as Fig. 4 but for O 3 . Fig. 5 O 3 pollution was amplified at all monitors, with gains ranging from +2.1–7.6 μg m −3 or +3.7–11.0%. In absolute terms, both the Hohe Warte and Hermannskogel monitors showed the largest increase of +7.6 μg m −3 . In relative terms, the largest increase of +11.0% occurred at Hohe Warte. The lowest increase occurred at Lobau, both in absolute and relative terms (+2.1 μg m −3 or +3.6%). The mean change in O 3 concentrations during LOCK-2020 was slightly greater at urban background monitors (+5.5 μg m −3 or +8.3%, n = 3) than at suburban background monitors (+5.3 μg m −3 or +7.7%, n = 2). During the lockdown in the United Kingdom (UK) for instance, mean O 3 increases of +7.2 μg m −3 or 11% across the UK’s urban background network have been reported ( Lee et al., 2020 ). The maximum occurrence frequency with daily O 3 concentrations above BAU levels was calculated for Hohe Warte (90% of the LOCK-2020 days). On average, positive daily O 3 concentration Δ were estimated for 81% of the days during the lockdown. By matching the monitors ( n = 4) with concomitant NO 2 and O 3 observations, the occurrence frequency of negative and positive daily concentration Δ for NO 2 and O 3 were respectively 77% and 83% during the lockdown. In addition, whilst the NO 2 RTN shapes reflected the road traffic patterns ( Fig. 2 ), the O 3 RTN shapes, in particular over the LOCK-2020 period, mirrored the NO 2 RTN shapes (direct comparisons can be made for Figs. 4 and 5 between the monitors where NO 2 and O 3 are measured concurrently). Fig. 6 shows the O x concentration Δ. It can be already grasped by visual inspection that the levels of O x follow similar temporal patterns to those of O 3 (discussed further later). O x concentrations increased by +3.8 μg m −3 at the city level during LOCK-2020, which equates to +4.3%. The changes in O x concentrations at urban background (+4.3 μg m −3 or +5.2%, n = 2) were slightly greater than at suburban background monitors (+3.4 μg m −3 or +4.1%, n = 2). Comparatively, the highest increase in O x was seen at Hohe Warte (+5.4 μg m −3 or +6.4%) and the smallest at Lobau (+1.1 μg m −3 or +1.8%). All in all, lower NO x and higher O 3 went side by side so that O x levels increased only slightly. Fig. 6 Same as Fig. 4 but for O x . Fig. 6 After applying the Mann-Whitney U test, only two cases did not show statistically significant differences between the observations and BAU predictions. These were for O 3 and O x at the Lobau monitor. All other pair of cases showed statistically significant differences (p &lt; 0.01). Figs. S5–S7 depict the observations and BAU predictions themselves. 3.3.3. Further interpretation of the changes To go further with the interpretation of the changes in air quality, Fig. 7 abridges the previously shown results by pollutant. The general impact of LOCK-2020 on the evaluated pollutants is depicted, besides their general RTN shapes over the study period. It is of interest first to contrast the mean NO 2 RTN shapes ( Fig. 7 , top panel) against Vienna’s traffic patterns ( Fig. 2 , left panel). Mean NO 2 concentrations reached BAU levels during May 2020 for the first time. However, MADT counts for LDV were lower during the whole study period. MADT counts for HDV, which make up a smaller proportion of the vehicle fleet, did not fall so expressively, and almost normal levels were observed in June 2020 relative to the same month in 2019. This suggests the potential role played by HDV emissions to the surface NO 2 concentrations. Additional research will be required to understand this qualitative insight further; nevertheless, the present results are clear in noting the implications for air quality management. In this regard, a COVID-19-related study has emphasised that urban NO x emissions are dominated by road traffic. However, this dominance could be much greater than currently reported in emission inventories ( Lamprecht et al., 2021 ). Previous works also show that HDV dominate vehicular NO x emissions ( Ghaffarpasand et al., 2020 ; Song et al., 2018 ). Based on emission factors calculated from real-world observations of low-cost sensors, it has been shown that high emitters contribute disproportionately to fleet emissions of not only NO x but also CO and PM 2.5 ( Liu and Zimmerman, 2021 ). Similarly, by developing a city-level high-resolution vehicular emission inventory, Maes et al. (2019) reported that most NO x emissions come from HDV. Hence, an important point to note here is that the changes in HDV counts could be the main driver of the changes in surface NO 2 concentrations during lockdowns. If so, control measures could be targeted at HDV with the potential to reduce total pollutant emissions from road traffic significantly and more effectively. It is recommended that such measures be integrated in the broader context of other emission sources and air pollutants. As the Viennese LOCK-2020 experience has shown for urban O 3 , a key aspect of air quality management is to achieve a balanced strategy of emission reductions. Fig. 7 Seven-day rolling mean of concentration deltas Δ for each pollutant between February 16 and September 30, 2020. Shaded areas are the standard deviation of the means. Dashed vertical lines indicate the LOCK-2020 period. Fig. 7 Moreover, the response of surface NO 2 to a change in NO x emissions was estimated to have a mean sensitivity of 0.8 ( Keller et al., 2021 ). This means that, on average, NO 2 concentrations at ground level reduce by roughly 80% of the fractional cut in anthropogenic NO x emissions. A diminished effect was stated to occur for emission reductions larger than 50% because of atmospheric chemistry and background NO 2 influences ( Keller et al., 2021 ). Fig. 7 also illustrates the chemical coupling between O 3 and NO 2 and, in turn, O x . During the whole study period (2015 to September 30, 2020), hourly O x concentrations are driven mainly by O 3 ( r = 0.90, p &lt; 0.01). This positive correlation has not changed its strength during LOCK-2020. It is essential to understand if the elevated concentrations of secondary pollutants like O 3 seen during strict lockdowns are due to chemistry (e.g., weakened titration, photochemical production and heterogeneous chemistry owing to decreased PM 2.5 ) or meteorological effects. As shown, the frequency of days with amplified O 3 concentrations was equivalent to the frequency of days with reduced NO 2 during the LOCK-2020 period in Vienna. After controlling for confounders, declines in NO 2 and gains in O 3 went hand in hand, so that O x levels increased only slightly. This reflects a propensity of photochemical repartitioning of NO 2 to O 3 , which is consistent with previous findings for European urban areas, and is not restricted to Vienna ( Grange et al., 2021 ; Lee et al., 2020 ; Wyche et al., 2021 ). The present results therefore suggest the lower O 3 titration by NO as the dominant cause for explaining the O 3 increases in Vienna. In other words, the lockdown measures resulted in less ozone being depleted locally by NO due to the unprecedented reduction in NO x emissions mainly from the road transport sector. Importantly, the outcome of gains in O 3 levels agrees with previous works for urban areas ( Dantas et al., 2020 ; Grange et al., 2021 ; Le et al., 2020 ; Lee et al., 2020 ; Sicard et al., 2020a ; Wyche et al., 2021 ). The RO 2 (organic peroxy), OH (hydroxyl) and HO 2 (hydroperoxyl) radical species are central to tropospheric photochemistry ( Levy, 1971 ; Monks et al., 2015 ; Seinfeld and Pandis, 2006 ; Sillman, 1999 ). The principal sources of these radicals in urban areas are the ultraviolet photolysis of O 3 itself, nitrous acid, and some carbonyls such as formaldehyde ( Li et al., 2021 and references therein). The role of chlorine atoms as relevant tropospheric oxidants has been increasingly acknowledged too ( Sommariva et al., 2021 ). The OH radical is particularly important because it initiates the removal of primary emissions, forming peroxy radicals (HO 2 and RO 2 ). Then, peroxy radicals form, in the presence of NO, secondary pollutants such as NO 2 , O 3 and particulates ( Whalley et al., 2021 ). If O x remains preserved, the reduction of fresh NO emissions will increase O 3 concentrations because a lesser amount of O x consists of NO 2 ( Clapp and Jenkin, 2001 ). In this sense, changes in O x can be understood as changes in the abundance of oxidants ( Lee et al., 2020 ). As a consequence, the slight mean O x increase during LOCK-2020 points to net photochemical production, which means that some part of the increase in O 3 is not solely attributable to weakened titration. It is premature to remark on the change in radical species without measurements or model calculations. However, as O x is frequently used as an indicator of the atmospheric oxidative capacity ( Chen et al., 2020 ; Grange et al., 2021 ), its small positive mean change is also suggesting some increase in overall reactivity of the urban boundary layer during LOCK-2020. With validated emission inventories, this premise can be tested with atmospheric chemistry models. For example, for China/Yangtze River Delta, a model study has reasoned that the dramatic reductions in NO x during the lockdown were responsible for gains of the OH, HO 2 and NO 3 reactive radical species ( Wang et al., 2021 ). Similarly, model simulations for the South East of the UK suggested increased radical levels, and indicated that the dominance of radical cycling over termination routes increased as a result of the lockdown ( Wyche et al., 2021 ). Regarding heterogeneous pathways, it has been suggested based on model simulations that the PM 2.5 decrease in the North China Plain since 2013 is the main driver for the O 3 increase due to reduced scavenging of HO 2 radicals to aerosol surfaces ( Li et al., 2019 ). There is though continued debated from field studies on the general validity of the proposed mechanism ( Tan et al., 2020 ). In order to make a simple comparison for Vienna, additional measurements were also taken for fine inhalable particles (PM 2.5 ). Directly from the observations, PM 2.5 decreased by −10.0% or −1.7 μg m −3 on average during LOCK-2020 compared with the same period in 2019. However, the finding by Li et al. is largely restricted to summer when PM 2.5 and O 3 had an overall positive correlation ( Li et al., 2019 , Li et al., 2021 ). Observational data also showed that daily PM 2.5 and O 3 were negative correlated ( r = −0.34, p &lt; 0.01) during the LOCK-2020 period in Vienna. Thus, it is conjectured that this heterogenous chemical pathway cannot explain the increases in O 3 during the lockdown. Despite such apparent mean decrease in PM 2.5 mass concentrations, a resultant oxidising environment may have facilitated secondary formation processes so that certain secondary aerosol components could show no changes or even increases ( Sun et al., 2020 ). Atmospheric chemistry models can separate local factors and regional transport to elucidate locally observed O 3 levels. It is acknowledged that the methods used here cannot rule out a potential contribution of regional transport of O 3 . By assuming PM 2.5 a marker for transported pollution, we can make an educated guess of the potential influence of regional O 3 at the site location ( Wyche et al., 2021 ). By comparing the daily mean concentrations of O 3 with PM 2.5 (not shown), correlated peaks in daily O 3 with respect to PM 2.5 were not detected during LOCK-2020 at two of the monitors with concomitant measurements of these pollutants (Lobau and Laaer Berg). As seen, a negative correlation between daily O 3 and PM 2.5 was calculated during the lockdown. This suggests that the increases in O 3 concentrations cannot merely be explained by transported pollution. Furthermore, according to Wyche et al. (2021) , the existence of isolated peaks in the time series of daily O 3 concentration Δ indicates substantial contributions to local O 3 concentrations due to lockdown-induced perturbations in the O 3 –NO x –VOC boundary layer chemistry. 3.4. Normalised pollutant time series Assessing the impact of interventions on air quality can be difficult for several reasons. The most problematic of these is perhaps meteorology. Meteorological effects can hide or even accentuate the underlying changes in pollutant concentrations actually coming from perturbations in chemistry and emissions. Controlling for meteorology and other effects such as seasonality is thus essential when examining interventions on the basis of changes in air pollutant concentrations over time. Doing so allows intervention assessment and trend analysis to be explored robustly ( Falocchi et al., 2021 ; Font et al., 2020 ; Grange et al., 2018 ; Grange and Carslaw, 2019 ; Ma et al., 2021 ; Vu et al., 2019 ). Here the normalisation technique was applied for intervention assessment by considering LOCK-2020 as the intervention, so its timing is known. The technique’s main idea is to use statistical models to reduce variability in the air quality time series. Fig. 8 shows the normalised pollutant concentration time series derived from the monitor-specific random forest models developed specifically for this purpose (Sec. 2.7 ). The predictive skill of these models was highly consistent with the performance of the models grown for the BAU scenarios during the model training and development phase ( Tables S2—S4 ). The main intention of this quantitative analysis was to substantiate the previous results qualitatively. The overall NO 2 trend is a more gradual decline in concentrations going into the LOCK-2020 period. The normalised NO 2 time series did not show localised changeability during LOCK-2020 as they have broadly similar patterns. In addition, the normalised time series captured the recovery of the NO 2 concentrations following LOCK-2020. This again indicates widespread changes in the city rather than isolated changes, which is related to the intervention’s spatial scale. However, the magnitude of the decline in NO 2 concentrations depends on the monitors’ environment, as expected. We see again that the most noticeable drops in NO 2 concentrations occurred at the urban traffic monitors (e.g., Hietzinger Kai, A23-Wehlistraße). In this sense, even with a significant intervention, this analysis also shows the challenge of clearly distinguishing changes when air pollutant concentrations are around background levels. The normalised O 3 time series were able to depict the increases in concentrations of this pollutant during LOCK-2020. The increases in O 3 concentrations were apparent at the urban background monitors after the lockdown began (Laaer Berg, Hohe Warte, Stephansplatz), while more subtle at the suburban background monitors (Hermannskogel and Lobau). Regarding O x , the normalised time series remained practically constant throughout LOCK-2020, indicating that the O x abundance was not altered expressively. Besides the environment of an air quality monitor, Fig. 8 demonstrates that the efficacy of the intervention assessment depends strongly on the air pollutant under scrutiny. Fig. 8 Seven-day rolling mean of the normalised pollutant time series between January 1 and September 30, 2020. Dashed vertical lines indicate the LOCK-2020 period. (For interpretation of the references to colour in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the Web version of this article) Fig. 8 Collectively the results shown in Fig. 8 agree well with the BAU-related outcomes, adding a converging layer of evidence of how the first COVID-19 lockdown has impacted NO 2 and O 3 air pollution in Vienna. Besides, the normalised time series indicate further that the detected changes, or lack thereof, in the pollutant concentrations are of anthropogenic and not meteorological origin. More generally, the suitability of the normalisation technique based on the random forest algorithm was shown for assessing the impact of a significant but relatively short-term intervention (Vienna’s first COVID-19 lockdown) at the site location for different pollutants. This was achieved using existing, routine air quality monitoring and meteorological measurements. In light of contextual information, the normalisation technique facilitated explaining lockdown-associated characteristics in the pollutant time series to a great extent. These characteristics are not always evident in the raw data. It is also clear-cut from Fig. 8 that interventions taking place in a short period of time and on a small spatial scale could be very challenging to detect and quantify, or even go unnoticed, by using statistical approaches such as the normalisation technique applied in this work. This limitation should be considered for assessing the effectiveness of small spatio-temporal scale interventions. It could frustrate even those measurement programs carefully designed to collect data to feed the methods. Examples of policy interventions intentionally implemented to improve air pollution more locally include low emission zones, expansions of public transport service, fuel changes, traffic bans and modifications of bus routes. 3.5. The importance of accounting for confounders A wide range of approaches has been applied to assess the impact of COVID-19 lockdowns on air quality ( Grange et al., 2021 ; Hörmann et al., 2021 ; Krecl et al., 2020 ; Le et al., 2020 ; Ordóñez et al., 2020 ; Petetin et al., 2020 ; Ropkins and Tate, 2021 ; Sharma et al., 2020 ; Tobías et al., 2020 ). This work contrasts a statistical approach (machine learning-based counterfactual predictions) against the ’historical approach’. The latter directly assesses air quality changes by comparing pollutant measurements during lockdowns with the same period in previous years. Due to its simplicity, it has been one of the most commonly used approaches. Here, the historical approach is based on the mean of the past five years (HIST-2015-2019) during the same period as the LOCK-2020. The NO 2 , O 3 , and O x changes on the random forest baseline reveal that the impact of Vienna’s first COVID-19 lockdown on air quality was not as large as the raw pollutant measurements indicate ( Fig. 9 ). Note that at the time of writing, a study also found that changes in pollutant concentrations due to lockdowns were more limited than previously reported ( Shi et al., 2021 ). Bigger differences (up to a factor of ∼2.3) between the two approaches were detected at the monitor scale compared with city-level aggregations. The present analysis further shows that the amount of bias differs not only by environment but also by pollutant. The bias is higher for O 3 and urban monitors. As shown in Sec. 3.2 , a significant cause for the differences in the magnitude of changes stems from variations in meteorological conditions. Quantification of air quality changes relative to multi-year baseline values partially controls for the problem, but it cannot fully solve it ( Venter et al., 2020 ). Moreover, meteorological conditions influence air pollutants differently. This goes back to the random forest models for NO 2 returning wind data as the most important explanatory variables. Similarly, the highest importance of the RH and T air variables was given by the models developed for O 3 and O x . Besides, potential pre-existing air pollutant trends due to reductions in primary emissions over the years also play a role in the historical approach. Hence, analyses of changes in air quality directly based on measured data resonate such confounding issues. Fig. 9 Percentage changes in NO 2 , O 3 and O x from the machine learning-derived business as usual (BAU) scenarios against the historical approach (HIST-2015-2019). (For interpretation of the references to colour in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the Web version of this article) Fig. 9 The direction of change was largely consistent between the two approaches, which holds for the LOCK-2020 duration (29 days). However, if shorter periods are considered, a previous study has shown that the historical approach can further exaggerate air quality changes ( Petetin et al., 2020 ). This adds to the present results to conclude that the bias of the historical approach can increase at shorter temporal and finer spatial scales. In short, estimated changes in air quality from the historical approach should be interpreted with care for diurnal cycles at the site location. 3.6. Implications Extensive epidemiological evidence shows the adverse health effects of exposure to air pollution ( Cohen et al., 2017 ). Despite the dynamic interchange of NO 2 and O 3 , relatively few studies have assessed the associations between health endpoints and exposure to these pollutants jointly. However, evidence is growing to indicate that the health effects of the simple sum of the two, O x ≡ NO 2 + O 3 , is greater than for either NO 2 or O 3 alone ( Hvidtfeldt et al., 2019 ; Williams et al., 2014 ; Yang et al., 2016 ). This knowledge could lead to a growing interest in investigating and controlling O x concentrations. Thus, the photochemical repartitioning of NO 2 to O 3 suggested by the first COVID-19 lockdown experience in Vienna may have consequences for public health and health impact assessments. Successful management of O 3 pollution is challenging ( Archibald et al., 2020 ; Monks et al., 2015 ). A central aspect of science-based policies is the O 3 formation regime ( Wang et al., 2017 ). Conclusively stating the Viennese O 3 regime is hampered because of the lack of routine VOC measurements concurrently with other pollutants. However, the present results indicate that the regime across Vienna is VOC-limited, which is typically seen for urban areas. Assuming that during the LOCK-2020 period, the supply of NO x emissions reduced equivalently more than VOCs, this scenario would lead to higher VOC/NO x ratios, resulting in an increase in O 3 pollution. This premise has been uncovered for example for Brazil/Rio de Janeiro: levels of O 3 increased more during the lockdown when air masses arrived at the monitors from industrial areas. This was due to the highest VOC/NO x ratios and also the likely increase in reactivity of VOC mixtures rich in aromatic compounds ( Siciliano et al., 2020 ). Fig. S8 shows the total anthropogenic NO x and non-methane VOC emissions (NMVOC) from Austria’s most recent inventory ( Anderl et al., 2021 ) as well as the latest available projections to date in a scenario with existing measures ( Anderl et al., 2019 ). If confirmed, projected total NMVOC emissions will exceed total NO x emissions in the near future in Austria. The emission scenario associated with the first lockdown in Vienna gave us a clue of this probable future, signalling the risk of an increase in urban O 3 . Therefore, to avoid potentially higher O 3 concentrations under these future projections, a control strategy should consider an equilibrium between the emission reductions of the different pollutants, especially focusing on heavier cuts in VOC emissions. 4. Conclusions The present study focused on how NO 2 and O 3 air pollution responded to the strict government measures enforced in early spring 2020 to slow the spread of the SARS-CoV-2 virus in Vienna, Austria. Through an in-depth analysis of Vienna’s first COVID-19 lockdown, this work shows that for a secondary pollutant like O 3 , its mitigation will remain complex and challenging. A projected future with VOC emissions falling slower than NO x emissions could risk an increase in urban ozone pollution under the VOC-limited conditions. Potential solutions include tailor-made, multi-pollutant strategies seeking to balance the emission reductions of O 3 precursors. In that sense, a recommendation is, in addition to reducing NO x emissions, to instigate more aggresive cuts in VOC emissions. A deeper understanding of the effects posed by meteorology and chemistry when approached by scientific questions can be valuable so as to develop more efficacious policy responses. We saw on the machine learning-based business as usual (BAU) baseline an improvement in air quality for NO 2 but not for O 3 during the LOCK-2020 period. The BAU scenarios showed that NO 2 concentrations reduced on average by −20.1% [13.7–30.4%] at the city level. However, O 3 concentrations increased by +8.5% [3.7–11.0%] across the city. O x levels increased by +4.3% [1.8–6.4%], which is important in the context of repartitioning of NO 2 to O 3 and from a human health perspective. The slight increases in O x levels also suggest an augmented oxidative capacity of the urban boundary layer owing to the imbalance in the reductions of primary anthropogenic emissions during LOCK-2020. The dominant cause of the increase in ambient O 3 during the lockdown was likely the lower O 3 titration by NO due to the large reductions in NO x emissions. Accordingly, this works found that 82% of lockdown days with reduced ambient NO 2 concentrations were accompanied by 81% of days with increased O 3 pollution. The recent access to global mobility data from big data providers offers a unique prospect for examining mobility changes from different standpoints. However, the use of Google transit data and Apple driving data can overestimate actual traffic reductions and associated emissions, especially for heavy-duty vehicles. Larger drops in road traffic volumes were observed for light-duty vehicles, while heavy-duty vehicles were much less affected by the COVID-19 pandemic. As heavy-duty vehicles are high NO x emitters, the change in the volume of these vehicles on the roads may be the main driver behind the NO 2 reductions. The impact of the lockdown on air quality was complex and significant, and its quantification is non-trivial. Nevertheless, this work suggests that air quality changes were probably not as large as previously reported. The present analysis demonstrated that accounting for confounders is crucial to appreciating air quality changes more robustly. Credit author statement Marlon Brancher: Conceptualisation, Methodology, Formal analysis, Investigation, Visualisation, Writing – original draft, Writing – review &amp; editing, Project administration. Declaration of competing interest The author declares no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. Acknowledgements Many thanks go to the institutions and professionals that provide open access datasets and tools, which have been essential to developing this work. Thanks to R. Plank (Stadt Wien | Umweltschutzabteilung MA 22) for furnishing the air quality data. Thanks to A. Fechner-Brancher for valuable discussions and proofreading the original manuscript. M. Brancher is currently supported by the Austrian Science Fund (FWF) in the framework of the Lise Meitner Programme [project number M 2548-N29]. Footnotes ☆ This paper has been recommended for acceptance by Pavlos Kassomenos. Appendix A Supplementary data to this article can be found online at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envpol.2021.117153 . Appendix A. Supplementary data The following is the Supplementary data to this article: Multimedia component 1 Multimedia component 1 References Adams M.D. Air pollution in ontario, Canada during the COVID-19 state of emergency. Sci. Total Environ. 2020;742:140516. doi: 10.1016/j.scitotenv.2020.140516. Anderl M., Haider S., Krutzler T., Lampert C., Poupa S., Purzner M., Schieder W., Storch A., Stranner G., Titz M., Zechmeister A. REP-0689. Umweltbundesamt; Vienna: 2019. Austria’s national air emission projections 2019 for 2020, 2025 and 2030. Pollutants: NOx, SO2, NMVOC, NH3 and PM2.5. Scenario: with Existing Measures (WEM) Anderl M., Haider S., Lampert C., Perl D., Pinterits M., Poupa S., Purzner M., Schieder W., Schmidt G., Schodl B., Titz M., Wieser M. REP-0760. Umweltbundesamt; Vienna: 2021. Austria‘s Annual Air Emission Inventory 1990—2019. Emissions of SO2 , NOx, NMVOC, NH3 and PM2,5. Apple Mobility Trends Reports. 2021. https://covid19.apple.com/mobility 1.5.21. Archibald A.T., Neu J.L., Elshorbany Y.F., Cooper O.R., Young P.J., Akiyoshi H., Cox R.A., Coyle M., Derwent R.G., Deushi M., Finco A., Frost G.J., Galbally I.E., Gerosa G., Granier C., Griffiths P.T., Hossaini R., Hu L., Jöckel P., Josse B., Lin M.Y., Mertens M., Morgenstern O., Naja M., Naik V., Oltmans S., Plummer D.A., Revell L.E., Saiz-Lopez A., Saxena P., Shin Y.M., Shahid I., Shallcross D., Tilmes S., Trickl T., Wallington T.J., Wang T., Worden H.M., Zeng G. Tropospheric Ozone Assessment Report: a critical review of changes in the tropospheric ozone burden and budget from 1850 to 2100. Elem. Sci. Anthr. 2020;8 doi: 10.1525/elementa.2020.034. ASFINAG Verkehrsentwicklung. 2021. https://www.asfinag.at/verkehr/verkehrszaehlung/ 12.17.20. Brancher M., Piringer M., Franco D., Belli Filho P., De Melo Lisboa H., Schauberger G. Assessing the inter-annual variability of separation distances around odour sources to protect the residents from odour annoyance. J. Environ. Sci. 2019;79:11–24. doi: 10.1016/j.jes.2018.09.018. Brancher M., Piringer M., Grauer A.F., Schauberger G. Do odour impact criteria of different jurisdictions ensure analogous separation distances for an equivalent level of protection? J. Environ. Manag. 2019;240:394–403. doi: 10.1016/j.jenvman.2019.03.102. Breiman L. Random forests. Mach. Learn. 2001;45:5–32. doi: 10.1023/A:1010933404324. Carslaw D.C. 2020. Worldmet: import surface meteorological data from NOAA integrated surface database (ISD) https://github.com/davidcarslaw/worldmet [WWW Document]. URL. Carslaw D.C., Ropkins K. Openair — an R package for air quality data analysis. Environ. Model. Software. 2012;27(28):52–61. doi: 10.1016/j.envsoft.2011.09.008. Chen S., Wang H., Lu K., Zeng L., Hu M., Zhang Y. The trend of surface ozone in Beijing from 2013 to 2019: Indications of the persisting strong atmospheric oxidation capacity. Atmos. Environ. 2020;242:117801. doi: 10.1016/j.atmosenv.2020.117801. Clapp L.J., Jenkin M.E. Analysis of the relationship between ambient levels of O3 , NO2 and NO as a function of NOx in the UK. Atmos. Environ. 2001;35:6391–6405. doi: 10.1016/S1352-2310(01)00378-8. Cohen A.J., Brauer M., Burnett R., Anderson H.R., Frostad J., Estep K., Balakrishnan K., Brunekreef B., Dandona L., Dandona R., Feigin V., Freedman G., Hubbell B., Jobling A., Kan H., Knibbs L., Liu Y., Martin R., Morawska L., Pope C.A., Shin H., Straif K., Shaddick G., Thomas M., van Dingenen R., van Donkelaar A., Vos T., Murray C.J.L., Forouzanfar M.H. Estimates and 25-year trends of the global burden of disease attributable to ambient air pollution: an analysis of data from the Global Burden of Diseases Study 2015. Lancet. 2017;389:1907–1918. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(17)30505-6. Collins W.J., Derwent R.G., Garnier B., Johnson C.E., Sanderson M.G., Stevenson D.S. Effect of stratosphere-troposphere exchange on the future tropospheric ozone trend. J. Geophys. Res. Atmos. 2003;108:1–10. doi: 10.1029/2002jd002617. Dantas G., Siciliano B., França B.B., da Silva C.M., Arbilla G. The impact of COVID-19 partial lockdown on the air quality of the city of Rio de Janeiro, Brazil. Sci. Total Environ. 2020;729:139085. doi: 10.1016/j.scitotenv.2020.139085. de Foy B., Brune W.H., Schauer J.J. Changes in ozone photochemical regime in Fresno, California from 1994 to 2018 deduced from changes in the weekend effect. Environ. Pollut. 2020;263:114380. doi: 10.1016/j.envpol.2020.114380. Evangeliou N., Platt S.M., Eckhardt S., Myhre C.L., Laj P., Alados-Arboledas L., Backman J., Brem B.T., Fiebig M., Flentje H., Marinoni A., Pandolfi M., Yus-Dìez J., Prats N., Putaud J.P., Sellegri K., Sorribas M., Eleftheriadis K., Vratolis S., Wiedensohler A., Stohl A. Changes in black carbon emissions over Europe due to COVID-19 lockdowns. Atmos. Chem. Phys. 2021;21:2675–2692. doi: 10.5194/acp-21-2675-2021. Falocchi M., Zardi D., Giovannini L. Meteorological normalization of NO2 concentrations in the Province of Bolzano (Italian Alps) Atmos. Environ. 2021;246:118048. doi: 10.1016/j.atmosenv.2020.118048. Font A., Tremper A.H., Lin C., Priestman M., Marsh D., Woods M., Heal M.R., Green D.C. Air quality in enclosed railway stations: quantifying the impact of diesel trains through deployment of multi-site measurement and random forest modelling. Environ. Pollut. 2020;262:114284. doi: 10.1016/j.envpol.2020.114284. Forster P.M., Forster H.I., Evans M.J., Gidden M.J., Jones C.D., Keller C.A., Lamboll R.D., Quéré C. Le, Rogelj J., Rosen D., Schleussner C.F., Richardson T.B., Smith C.J., Turnock S.T. Current and future global climate impacts resulting from COVID-19. Nat. Clim. Change. 2020;10:913–919. doi: 10.1038/s41558-020-0883-0. Ghaffarpasand O., Beddows D.C.S., Ropkins K., Pope F.D. Real-world assessment of vehicle air pollutant emissions subset by vehicle type, fuel and EURO class: New findings from the recent UK EDAR field campaigns, and implications for emissions restricted zones. Sci. Total Environ. 2020;734:139416. doi: 10.1016/j.scitotenv.2020.139416. Google Community Mobility Reports. 2021. https://www.google.com/covid19/mobility/ 1.5.21. Grange S.K., Carslaw D.C. Using meteorological normalisation to detect interventions in air quality time series. Sci. Total Environ. 2019;653:578–588. doi: 10.1016/j.scitotenv.2018.10.344. Grange S.K., Carslaw D.C., Lewis A.C., Boleti E., Hueglin C. Random forest meteorological normalisation models for Swiss PM10 trend analysis. Atmos. Chem. Phys. 2018;18:6223–6239. doi: 10.5194/acp-18-6223-2018. Grange S.K., Lee J.D., Drysdale W.S., Lewis A.C., Hueglin C., Emmenegger L., Carslaw D.C. COVID-19 lockdowns highlight a risk of increasing ozone pollution in European urban areas. Atmos. Chem. Phys. 2021;21:4169–4185. doi: 10.5194/acp-21-4169-2021. Guevara M., Jorba O., Soret A., Petetin H., Bowdalo D., Serradell K., Tena C., Denier van der Gon H., Kuenen J., Peuch V.-H., Pérez García-Pando C. Time-resolved emission reductions for atmospheric chemistry modelling in Europe during the COVID-19 lockdowns. Atmos. Chem. Phys. 2021;21:773–797. doi: 10.5194/acp-21-773-2021. Hörmann S., Jammoul F., Kuenzer T., Stadlober E. Separating the impact of gradual lockdown measures on air pollutants from seasonal variability. Atmos. Pollut. Res. 2021;12:84–92. doi: 10.1016/j.apr.2020.10.011. Hvidtfeldt U.A., Sørensen M., Geels C., Ketzel M., Khan J., Tjønneland A., Overvad K., Brandt J., Raaschou-Nielsen O. Long-term residential exposure to PM2.5, PM10, black carbon, NO2, and ozone and mortality in a Danish cohort. Environ. Int. 2019;123:265–272. doi: 10.1016/j.envint.2018.12.010. Jacob D.J., Winner D.A. Effect of climate change on air quality. Atmos. Environ. 2009;43:51–63. doi: 10.1016/j.atmosenv.2008.09.051. Jephcote C., Hansell A.L., Adams K., Gulliver J. Changes in air quality during COVID-19 ‘lockdown’ in the United Kingdom. Environ. Pollut. 2021;272:116011. doi: 10.1016/j.envpol.2020.116011. Keller C.A., Evans M.J., Knowland K.E., Hasenkopf C.A., Modekurty S., Lucchesi R.A., Oda T., Franca B.B., Mandarino F.C., Díaz Suárez M.V., Ryan R.G., Fakes L.H., Pawson S. Global impact of COVID-19 restrictions on the atmospheric concentrations of nitrogen dioxide and ozone. Atmos. Chem. Phys. 2021;21:3555–3592. doi: 10.5194/acp-21-3555-2021. Krecl P., Targino A.C., Oukawa G.Y., Cassino Junior R.P. Drop in urban air pollution from COVID-19 pandemic: Policy implications for the megacity of São Paulo. Environ. Pollut. 2020;265:114883. doi: 10.1016/j.envpol.2020.114883. Kroll J.H., Heald C.L., Cappa C.D., Farmer D.K., Fry J.L., Murphy J.G., Steiner A.L. The complex chemical effects of COVID-19 shutdowns on air quality. Nat. Chem. 2020;12:777–779. doi: 10.1038/s41557-020-0535-z. Lamprecht C., Graus M., Striednig M., Stichaner M., Karl T. Decoupling of urban CO2 and air pollutant emission reductions during the European SARS-CoV2 lockdown. Atmos. Chem. Phys. 2021;21:3091–3102. doi: 10.5194/acp-21-3091-2021. Laughner J.L., Cohen R.C. Direct observation of changing NOx lifetime in North American cities. Science. 2019;366:723–727. doi: 10.1126/science.aax6832. Le Quéré C., Jackson R.B., Jones M.W., Smith A.J.P., Abernethy S., Andrew R.M., De-Gol A.J., Willis D.R., Shan Y., Canadell J.G., Friedlingstein P., Creutzig F., Peters G.P. Temporary reduction in daily global CO2 emissions during the COVID-19 forced confinement. Nat. Clim. Change. 2020;10:647–653. doi: 10.1038/s41558-020-0797-x. Le T., Wang Y., Liu L., Yang J., Yung Y.L., Li G., Seinfeld J.H. Unexpected air pollution with marked emission reductions during the COVID-19 outbreak in China. Science. 2020;369:702–706. doi: 10.1126/science.abb7431. Lee J., Drysdale W., Finch D., Wilde S., Palmer P. UK surface NO2 levels dropped by 42 % during the COVID-19 lockdown: impact on surface O3. Atmos. Chem. Phys. 2020;20:15743–15759. doi: 10.5194/acp-20-15743-2020. Levy H. Normal Atmosphere: Large Radical and Formaldehyde Concentrations Predicted. Science. 1971;173:141–143. doi: 10.1126/science.173.3992.141. Li K., Jacob D.J., Liao H., Qiu Y., Shen L., Zhai S., Bates K.H., Sulprizio M.P., Song S., Lu X., Zhang Q., Zheng B., Zhang Y., Zhang J., Lee H.C., Kuk S.K. Ozone pollution in the North China Plain spreading into the late-winter haze season. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 2021;118:1–7. doi: 10.1073/pnas.2015797118. Li K., Jacob D.J., Liao H., Shen L., Zhang Q., Bates K.H. Anthropogenic drivers of 2013–2017 trends in summer surface ozone in China. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 2019;116:422–427. doi: 10.1073/pnas.1812168116. Liu B., Zimmerman N. Fleet-based vehicle emission factors using low-cost sensors: case study in parking garages. Transport. Res. Transport Environ. 2021;91:102635. doi: 10.1016/j.trd.2020.102635. Lovri M., Pavlovi K., Vukovi M., Grange S.K., Haberl M., Kern R. Understanding the true effects of the COVID-19 lockdown on air pollution by means of machine learning. Environ. Pollut. 2021:115900. doi: 10.1016/j.envpol.2020.115900. Lu X., Zhang L., Shen L. Meteorology and Climate Influences on Tropospheric Ozone: a Review of Natural Sources, Chemistry, and Transport Patterns. Curr. Pollut. Reports. 2019;5:238–260. doi: 10.1007/s40726-019-00118-3. Luo J., Qin G., Cheng J. Ozone pollution mitigation in guangxi (south China) driven by meteorology and anthropogenic emissions during the COVID-19. Environ. Pollut. 2020 doi: 10.1016/j.envpol.2020.115927. 115927. Ma L., Graham D.J., Stettler M.E.J. Air quality impacts of new public transport provision: A causal analysis of the Jubilee Line Extension in London. Atmos. Environ. 2021;245:118025. doi: 10.1016/j.atmosenv.2020.118025. Maes A. de S., Hoinaski L., Meirelles T.B., Carlson R.C. A methodology for high resolution vehicular emissions inventories in metropolitan areas: Evaluating the effect of automotive technologies improvement. Transport. Res. Transport Environ. 2019;77:303–319. doi: 10.1016/j.trd.2019.10.007. Menut L., Bessagnet B., Siour G., Mailler S., Pennel R., Cholakian A. Impact of lockdown measures to combat Covid-19 on air quality over western Europe. Sci. Total Environ. 2020;741:140426. doi: 10.1016/j.scitotenv.2020.140426. Miyazaki K., Bowman K., Sekiya T., Jiang Z., Chen X., Eskes H., Ru M., Zhang Y., Shindell D. Air quality response in China linked to the 2019 novel Coronavirus (COVID-19) lockdown. Geophys. Res. Lett. 2020;47:1–10. doi: 10.1029/2020GL089252. Monks P.S., Archibald A.T., Colette A., Cooper O., Coyle M., Derwent R., Fowler D., Granier C., Law K.S., Mills G.E., Stevenson D.S., Tarasova O., Thouret V., Von Schneidemesser E., Sommariva R., Wild O., Williams M.L. Tropospheric ozone and its precursors from the urban to the global scale from air quality to short-lived climate forcer. Atmos. Chem. Phys. 2015;15:8889–8973. doi: 10.5194/acp-15-8889-2015. Ordóñez C., Garrido-Perez J.M., García-Herrera R. Early spring near-surface ozone in Europe during the COVID-19 shutdown: Meteorological effects outweigh emission changes. Sci. Total Environ. 2020;747:141322. doi: 10.1016/j.scitotenv.2020.141322. Petetin H., Bowdalo D., Soret A., Guevara M., Jorba O., Serradell K., Pérez García-Pando C. Meteorology-normalized impact of the COVID-19 lockdown upon NO2 pollution in Spain. Atmos. Chem. Phys. 2020;20:11119–11141. doi: 10.5194/acp-20-11119-2020. Pollak M., Kowarz N., Partheymüller J. 2020. Chronology of the Corona Crisis in Austria - Part 1: Background, the Way to the Lockdown, the Acute Phase and Economic Consequences. https://viecer.univie.ac.at/en/projects-and-cooperations/austrian-corona-panel-project/corona-blog/corona-blog-beitraege/blog51/ 11.7.20. Ropkins K., Tate J.E. Early observations on the impact of the COVID-19 lockdown on air quality trends across the UK. Sci. Total Environ. 2021;754:142374. doi: 10.1016/j.scitotenv.2020.142374. Seinfeld J.H., Pandis S.N. 2 ed. Wiley; New Jersey: 2006. Atmospheric Chemistry and Physics from Air Pollution to Climate Change. Sharma S., Zhang M., Anshika Gao J., Zhang H., Kota S.H. Effect of restricted emissions during COVID-19 on air quality in India. Sci. Total Environ. 2020;728:138878. doi: 10.1016/j.scitotenv.2020.138878. Shi Z., Song C., Liu B., Lu G., Xu J., Van Vu T., Elliott R.J.R., Li W., Bloss W.J., Harrison R.M. Abrupt but smaller than expected changes in surface air quality attributable to COVID-19 lockdowns. Sci. Adv. 2021;7 doi: 10.1126/sciadv.abd6696. Sicard P., De Marco A., Agathokleous E., Feng Z., Xu X., Paoletti E., Rodriguez J.J.D., Calatayud V. Amplified ozone pollution in cities during the COVID-19 lockdown. Sci. Total Environ. 2020;735:139542. doi: 10.1016/j.scitotenv.2020.139542. Sicard P., Paoletti E., Agathokleous E., Araminienė V., Proietti C., Coulibaly F., De Marco A. Ozone weekend effect in cities: Deep insights for urban air pollution control. Environ. Res. 2020;191:110193. doi: 10.1016/j.envres.2020.110193. Siciliano B., Dantas G., Cleyton M., Arbilla G. Increased ozone levels during the COVID-19 lockdown: Analysis for the city of Rio de Janeiro , Brazil. Sci. Total Environ. 2020;737:139765. doi: 10.1016/j.scitotenv.2020.139765. Sillman S. The relation between ozone, NOx and hydrocarbons in urban and polluted rural environments. Atmos. Environ. 1999;33:1821–1845. doi: 10.1016/S1352-2310(98)00345-8. Singh V., Singh S., Biswal A., Kesarkar A.P., Mor S., Ravindra K. Diurnal and temporal changes in air pollution during COVID-19 strict lockdown over different regions of India. Environ. Pollut. 2020;266:115368. doi: 10.1016/j.envpol.2020.115368. Sommariva R., Crilley L.R., Ball S.M., Cordell R.L., Hollis L.D.J., Bloss W.J., Monks P.S. Enhanced wintertime oxidation of VOCs via sustained radical sources in the urban atmosphere. Environ. Pollut. 2021;274:116563. doi: 10.1016/j.envpol.2021.116563. Song C., Ma C., Zhang Y., Wang T., Wu L., Wang P., Liu Y., Li Q., Zhang J., Dai Q., Zou C., Sun L., Mao H. Heavy-duty diesel vehicles dominate vehicle emissions in a tunnel study in northern China. Sci. Total Environ. 2018;637–638:431–442. doi: 10.1016/j.scitotenv.2018.04.387. Soni M., Ojha N., Girach I. Impact of COVID-19 lockdown on surface ozone build-up at an urban site in western India based on photochemical box modelling. Curr. Sci. 2021;120:376–381. Statistics Vienna . Statistics; Vienna: Province of Vienna: 2020. Vienna in Figures 2020. STATISTIK AUSTRIA . Bundesanstalt Statistik Österreich. Zivilluftfahrtstatistik. 2020 Vorläufige Werte - Erstellt am 10.07.2020; 2020. Wie hat sich der Flugbetrieb dieses Jahr verändert? Fluggäste auf Österreichs Flughäfen. https://www.statistik.at/ Stohl A., Kromp-Kolb H. Origin of ozone in Vienna and surroundings, Austria. Atmos. Environ. 1994;28:1255–1266. doi: 10.1016/1352-2310(94)90272-0. Sun Y., Lei L., Zhou W., Chen C., He Y., Sun J., Li Z., Xu W., Wang Q., Ji D., Fu P., Wang Z., Worsnop D.R. A chemical cocktail during the COVID-19 outbreak in Beijing, China: Insights from six-year aerosol particle composition measurements during the Chinese New Year holiday. Sci. Total Environ. 2020;742:140739. doi: 10.1016/j.scitotenv.2020.140739. Tan Z., Hofzumahaus A., Lu K., Brown S.S., Holland F., Huey L.G., Kiendler-scharr A., Li X., Liu X., Ma N., Min K., Rohrer F., Shao M., Wahner A., Wang Y., Wiedensohler A., Wu Y., Wu Z., Zeng L., Zhang Y., Fuchs H. No evidence for a significant impact of heterogeneous chemistry on radical concentrations in the North China plain in summer 2014. Environ. Sci. Technol. 2020;54:5973–5979. doi: 10.1021/acs.est.0c00525. Targino A.C., Harrison R.M., Krecl P., Glantz P., de Lima C.H., Beddows D. Surface ozone climatology of South Eastern Brazil and the impact of biomass burning events. J. Environ. Manag. 2019;252:109645. doi: 10.1016/j.jenvman.2019.109645. Tobías A., Carnerero C., Reche C., Massagué J., Via M., Minguillón M.C., Alastuey A., Querol X. Changes in air quality during the lockdown in Barcelona (Spain) one month into the SARS-CoV-2 epidemic. Sci. Total Environ. 2020;726:138540. doi: 10.1016/j.scitotenv.2020.138540. Umweltschutzabteilung der Stadt Wien . 2020. Jahresbericht 2019, Luftgütemessungen der Umweltschutzabteilung der Stadt Wien gemäß Immissionsschutzgesetz – Luft. MA 22 –376947/2020. Stadt Wien | Umweltschutz. United Nations . Department of Economic and Social Affairs, Population Division; New York: United Nations: 2019. World Urbanization Prospects: the 2018 Revision (ST/ESA/SER.A/420) Venter Z.S., Aunan K., Chowdhury S., Lelieveld J. COVID-19 lockdowns cause global air pollution declines. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 2020;117:18984–18990. doi: 10.1073/pnas.2006853117. Von Schneidemesser E., Monks P.S., Allan J.D., Bruhwiler L., Forster P., Fowler D., Lauer A., Morgan W.T., Paasonen P., Righi M., Sindelarova K., Sutton M.A. Chemistry and the linkages between air quality and climate change. Chem. Rev. 2015;115:3856–3897. doi: 10.1021/acs.chemrev.5b00089. Vu T.V., Shi Z., Cheng J., Zhang Q., He K., Wang S., Harrison R.M. Assessing the impact of clean air action plan on air quality trends in Beijing megacity using a machine learning technique. Atmos. Chem. Phys. 2019;19:11303–11314. doi: 10.5194/acp-19-11303-2019. Wang T., Xue L., Brimblecombe P., Lam Y.F., Li L., Zhang L. Ozone pollution in China: A review of concentrations, meteorological influences, chemical precursors, and effects. Sci. Total Environ. 2017;575:1582–1596. doi: 10.1016/j.scitotenv.2016.10.081. Wang Y., Zhu S., Ma J., Shen J., Wang Pengfei, Wang Peng, Zhang H. Enhanced atmospheric oxidation capacity and associated ozone increases during COVID-19 lockdown in the Yangtze River Delta. Sci. Total Environ. 2021;768:144796. doi: 10.1016/j.scitotenv.2020.144796. Wang Yunjie, Wen Y., Wang Yue, Zhang S., Zhang K.M., Zheng H., Xing J., Wu Y., Hao J. Four-month changes in air quality during and after the COVID-19 lockdown in six megacities in China. Environ. Sci. Technol. Lett. 2020;7:802–808. doi: 10.1021/acs.estlett.0c00605. Whalley L.K., Slater E.J., Woodward-Massey R., Ye C., Lee J.D., Squires F., Hopkins J.R., Dunmore R.E., Shaw M., Hamilton J.F., Lewis A.C., Mehra A., Worrall S.D., Bacak A., Bannan T.J., Coe H., Percival C.J., Ouyang B., Jones R.L., Crilley L.R., Kramer L.J., Bloss W.J., Vu T., Kotthaus S., Grimmond S., Sun Y., Xu W., Yue S., Ren L., Acton W.J.F., Hewitt C.N., Wang X., Fu P., Heard D.E. Evaluating the sensitivity of radical chemistry and ozone formation to ambient VOCs and NOx in Beijing. Atmos. Chem. Phys. 2021;21:2125–2147. doi: 10.5194/acp-21-2125-2021. Wickham H., Averick M., Bryan J., Chang W., McGowan L., François R., Grolemund G., Hayes A., Henry L., Hester J., Kuhn M., Pedersen T., Miller E., Bache S., Müller K., Ooms J., Robinson D., Seidel D., Spinu V., Takahashi K., Vaughan D., Wilke C., Woo K., Yutani H. Welcome to the tidyverse. J. Open Source Softw. 2019;4:1686. doi: 10.21105/joss.01686. Williams M.L., Atkinson R.W., Anderson H.R., Kelly F.J. Associations between daily mortality in London and combined oxidant capacity, ozone and nitrogen dioxide. Air Qual. Atmos. Heal. 2014;7:407–414. doi: 10.1007/s11869-014-0249-8. Wright M.N., Ziegler A. Ranger: a fast implementation of random forests for high dimensional data in C++ and R. J. Stat. Software. 2017;77:1–17. doi: 10.18637/jss.v077.i01. Wyche K.P., Nichols M., Parfitt H., Beckett P., Gregg D.J., Smallbone K.L., Monks P.S. Changes in ambient air quality and atmospheric composition and reactivity in the South East of the UK as a result of the COVID-19 lockdown. Sci. Total Environ. 2021;755:142526. doi: 10.1016/j.scitotenv.2020.142526. Yang C., Li H., Chen R., Xu W., Wang C., Tse L.A., Zhao Z., Kan H. Combined atmospheric oxidant capacity and increased levels of exhaled nitric oxide. Environ. Res. Lett. 2016;11 doi: 10.1088/1748-9326/11/7/074014. ZAMG . 2020. März 2020 mild, sonnig und größtenteils trocken. https://www.zamg.ac.at/cms/de/klima/news/maerz-2020-mild-sonnig-und-groesstenteils-trocken 11.25.20. ZAMG . 2020. April 2020 sehr warm, sehr trocken und sehr sonnig. https://www.zamg.ac.at/cms/de/klima/news/april-2020-sehr-warm-sehr-trocken-und-sehr-sonnig 11.25.20. Associated Data Supplementary Materials Multimedia component 1 Multimedia component 1