379 blackwellopen Global Change Biology Glob Chang Biol PMC12555873 12555873 12555873 41140174 10.1111/gcb.70564 Groundwater and Remotely Sensed Phenology Reveal Vulnerability of Riparian Trees to Drought Mohammadi Rose M 1 ✉ Dawson Todd E 1 2 Tiedeman Claire R 3 Stella John C 4 Ruhí Albert 1 1 Department of Environmental Science, Policy, and Management, University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, California, USA 2 Department of Integrative Biology, University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, California, USA 3 Retired Hydrologist, Sunnyvale, CA, USA 4 Department of Sustainable Resources Management, State University of New York College of Environmental Science and Forestry, Syracuse, New York, USA * Correspondence: Rose M. Mohammadi ( rmohammadi@berkeley.edu ) ✉ Corresponding author. 27 10 2025 31 10 e70564 e70564 28 10 2025 © 2025 The Author(s). Global Change Biology published by John Wiley &amp; Sons Ltd. This is an open access article under the terms of the http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/4.0/ License, which permits use, distribution and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited and is not used for commercial purposes. ABSTRACT The increasing frequency and magnitude of climatic extremes are altering water availability in dryland ecosystems globally. However, riparian vulnerability to hydroclimate whiplash remains poorly understood. Here, we examined how riparian willow, cottonwood, and valley oak trees respond to groundwater fluctuations and drought through their water use patterns and phenology. To this end, we combined time‐series analysis of in situ, high‐frequency groundwater monitoring with high‐resolution PlanetScope satellite imagery of a drought‐prone and relatively pristine watershed in California (Chalone Creek, Pinnacles National Park). We found that flow regime dictates the potential for trees to access groundwater, while the identity of tree species determines the timing and magnitude of their use. Machine‐learning models revealed that at intermittent sites groundwater depth predominantly controlled vegetation greenness, represented by the Normalized Difference Vegetation Index (NDVI). In contrast, variation in photoperiod length dominated at the perennial site where water was more reliably available. During the severe 2020–2022 drought, all species experienced reduced greenness, but phenological responses differed by flow regime. While the start of the season was delayed across all sites, trees at intermittent reaches exhibited a substantially earlier end of season during drought, resulting in growing seasons shortened by as much as 37 days. These phenological shifts vastly exceed those documented across aridity classifications in global datasets from satellite observations, ground‐based monitoring networks, and experimental precipitation manipulations. Although riparian trees in drylands have been shaped by exposure to drought over evolutionary timescales, our findings show that trees in these intermittent systems may be operating close to critical groundwater thresholds, rendering them particularly vulnerable to increasingly long and severe droughts. Keywords: drought, groundwater, phenology, riparian vegetation, time‐series analysis We asked how vulnerable riparian trees are to droughts, examining their water use and growing season timing and duration via groundwater data and satellite imagery. Drought shortened the growing season by up to 5 weeks for trees growing along river sections that dry up seasonally. Our results suggest that riparian woodlands may be operating close to critical groundwater thresholds, rendering them vulnerable to increasingly severe droughts. status released display-pdf yes is-in-collection-domain yes is-olf no is-manuscript no is-preprint no is-journal-matter no is-scanned no is-retracted no Revised 2025 Aug 30; Received 2025 May 15; Accepted 2025 Sep 29; Issue date 2025 Oct. 1. Introduction Increasing climate variability, including more frequent and extreme droughts punctuated by exceptionally wet years, is reshaping water availability in dryland ecosystems globally. In California, this hydroclimate whiplash is driven by intensifying atmospheric river activity and warming temperatures, resulting in precipitation extremes that are unprecedented in the past 600 years (Dettinger 2011 ; Swain et al. 2025 ). This volatility poses a serious risk to dryland riparian zones, which, despite covering a small percentage of land area, contribute a disproportionately large fraction of landscape‐scale primary productivity and evapotranspiration (Doody et al. 2023 ). Riparian corridors are also biodiversity hotspots, serving as thermal and moisture refuges that support different assemblages than those found in aquatic or terrestrial environments, as well as many rare and endemic species (Sabo et al. 2005 ; Cartwright et al. 2020 ). However, these ecosystems are threatened by changes in water availability, including alterations of natural flow regimes and declines in groundwater levels (Stromberg et al. 1996 ; Stromberg 2001 ; Williams and Cooper 2005 ). Despite their ecological importance, the vulnerability of dryland riparian zones to interannual variation in hydroclimate remains poorly understood. Dryland riparian vegetation is adapted to localized and fluctuating water availability, including periods of low and high flow (Lytle and Poff 2004 ). Different species cope with water deficits differently, along a continuum from anisohydric to isohydric responses (McDowell et al. 2008 , 2022 ; Hultine et al. 2020 ). Anisohydric species tolerate drought by keeping stomata open, thus maintaining a positive carbon balance, but that strategy comes at the risk of low leaf water potentials and potential hydraulic failure. In contrast, isohydric species close their stomata or shed leaves to keep leaf water potentials relatively constant, avoiding short‐term, cavitation‐induced mortality but risking long‐term carbon starvation instead (Rood et al. 2003 ; McDowell et al. 2008 ; Zunzunegui et al. 2011 ). These strategies may not always suffice in light of intensifying droughts, which often push riparian ecosystems beyond resilience thresholds (e.g., severe crown die‐back, whole‐stand mortality) (Stella et al. 2013 ; Stella and Bendix 2019 ). Phenological shifts such as changes in the timing of leaf out, flowering, fruiting, and senescence can help reduce drought stress (Menzel et al. 2006 ; Wada et al. 2014 ; Piao et al. 2019 ), and increasing evidence suggests that droughts can prolong senescence in dryland riparian ecosystems (Kibler et al. 2021 ; Warter et al. 2021 ). Because climate and non‐climate stressors often co‐occur, understanding how climatic extremes induce phenological change poses a challenge. Groundwater, or water stored in the saturated zone, is a critical resource in dryland riparian ecosystems. In intermittent streams that stop flowing or completely dry up for part of the year, shallow groundwater can support critical refugia for aquatic food webs, including invertebrates, fish, and amphibians that require long flow durations (Bogan et al. 2017 ; Palmer and Ruhí 2019 ). In terrestrial ecosystems, groundwater sustains phreatophytes, which are plants that rely on groundwater (Orellana et al. 2012 ; Hultine et al. 2020 ). During dry periods, groundwater can become decoupled from vadose zone soil moisture, providing an alternative water source and allowing these deeply rooted plants to escape the effects of dry soil moisture conditions (Gou and Miller 2014 ; Quichimbo et al. 2020 ). Further, temporal variation in the availability of the different water sources can influence the phenology of key life history events. For example, willows and cottonwoods (Salicaceae) synchronize propagule dispersal with peak or receding spring flows (Stella et al. 2006 ), and floods further promote their dispersal via root and shoot regeneration (Karrenberg et al. 2002 ). In temperate environments, temperature is generally considered the primary control of plant phenology (Cleland et al. 2007 ; Piao et al. 2019 ), such as the date of springtime leaf flush in Salicaceae (Friedman et al. 2011 ). Photoperiod also plays a critical role, for example, in the timing of autumn senescence for Salicaceae species (Pauley and Perry 1954 ; Friedman et al. 2011 ). However, in some water‐limited dryland ecosystems, moisture availability can also control vegetation growth and annual peaks and troughs of greenness (Rodriguez‐Iturbe 2000 ; D'Odorico et al. 2007 ; Warter et al. 2023 ). Therefore, drought‐induced changes in moisture availability arising from variation in groundwater depth and surface streamflow could greatly alter riparian tree phenology along river corridors. Understanding how riparian vegetation interacts with fluctuations in groundwater across intermittent river networks requires capturing both fine‐scale temporal variation and spatial context. Intermittent watersheds are highly dynamic and spatially heterogeneous (Datry et al. 2016 ), with stream corridors that experience rapid hydrologic shifts. High‐frequency groundwater depth measurements can offer key insights into plant–water interactions, particularly when paired with remote sensing tools that track vegetation change over time (Elmore et al. 2006 ). Integrating time‐frequency methods like wavelet transforms can reveal hydrologic signatures that would be missed using standard time–domain approaches (Yu and Lin 2015 ; Ruhí et al. 2018 ). Combining these techniques with machine learning may allow for a nuanced understanding of species‐specific water use strategies and how different plants respond to water stress (Ruehr et al. 2023 ; Qiao et al. 2024 ). In this study, we applied a novel combination of time‐series and machine‐learning methods to understand vegetation response across temporal scales and to identify the environmental drivers of phenological change. California's hydroclimate over the last decade provides a unique opportunity to examine how riparian vegetation responds to rapid swings in water availability. The state has recently experienced record‐setting drought years—water years 2021 and 2022 were the second and third driest on record in California (California Department of Water Resources 2021 , 2022 )—and exceptionally wet years (2019, 2023, 2024). These conditions create an ideal opportunity to study how riparian trees change their water use strategies and phenology in response to shifting moisture availability. Our study focuses on an unmodified, highly instrumented river network, Chalone Creek (Pinnacles National Park, California), which has a gradient of streamflow permanence and varying groundwater regimes. We explored three questions: (1) How do the timing and magnitude of groundwater use by riparian trees vary with flow regime and season across the stream network? (2) How does variation in depth to groundwater influence riparian vegetation phenology in intermittent and perennial stream reaches, and how does its importance compare to other environmental drivers of phenology and greenness? (3) How sensitive are riparian ecohydrologic processes to drought, and how does this sensitivity compare to other ecosystems globally? We hypothesized that the source and timing of riparian tree groundwater use would be mediated by both flow regime and species‐specific traits like phenology and rooting depth. Specifically, at the perennial stream reach with consistently available groundwater, we predicted the community water‐use signal would be strongly seasonal, tracking the phenology of dominant deciduous species. In contrast, at intermittent reaches, we predicted that year‐round dependence on deeper groundwater would occur primarily among deep‐rooted evergreen species, while shallower‐rooted species would experience seasonal disconnection from groundwater (Snyder and Williams 2000 ; Sargeant and Singer 2016 ; Gou and Miller 2014 ; Flanagan et al. 2019 ; Williams et al. 2024 ). Consequently, we expected depth to groundwater and precipitation to exert the strongest influence on vegetation canopy greenness (Huntington et al. 2016 ; Rohde et al. 2021 ). We also predicted that drought would shorten the growing season by accelerating leaf senescence, with this effect being more pronounced at intermittent sites compared to the perennial site due to more limited groundwater access in the former (Rood et al. 2000 ). Finally, we hypothesized that dryland riparian ecosystems may be more sensitive to drought, due to their strong reliance on variable groundwater, than more humid ecosystems in other climates with more stable moisture availability. Thus, we expected that drought would induce strong phenological shifts (e.g., earlier leaf senescence) in dryland riparian trees, revealing the vulnerability of these critical ecosystems to the ongoing intensification of the hydrologic cycle. 2. Methods 2.1. Study Site Chalone Creek, Pinnacles National Park, California, is an intermittent watershed where about 90% of the stream network naturally dries for part of the year. Stream reaches along the network span a broad range of flow permanence (from ~15% to 100%), and groundwater discharges from several springs throughout the park, which in the dry season are the sole source of flow in the few perennial reaches. The mainstem of Chalone Creek is a losing stream—the creek tends to recharge the groundwater system during wet‐season periods when precipitation is minor or absent—while its main tributary, Sandy Creek, is a gaining stream, with groundwater discharging to surface water flow. In both alluvial areas, groundwater flows southerly, following the creek drainages. The aquifer is recharged by precipitation and inflow from alluvium upstream (Scheiderich et al. 2022 ). The watershed has a Mediterranean climate, with hot, dry summers and cool, moderately wet winters, and most precipitation falls from October to May. We delineate the wet and dry seasons using precipitation data, whereby the wet season begins when accumulated precipitation in the water year exceeds 20 mm and ends with the last day of precipitation before the summer (June 1). The dry season is the period between wet seasons. Average annual precipitation was 414 mm from 1937 to 2024 (Western Regional Climate Center 2024a , 2024b ). The study period includes both wet and dry years compared to the long‐term average: water years 2020 (300 mm), 2021 (223 mm), and 2022 (225 mm) received below‐average rainfall, consistent with water years 2021 and 2022 being the second and third driest on record in California (California Department of Water Resources 2021 , 2022 ). In turn, water years 2019 (446 mm), 2023 (581 mm), and 2024 (426 mm) received above‐average rainfall. 2.2. Groundwater Data Collection and Processing Depth to water table (DTW, m) data were collected from four monitoring wells located on the floodplain at 15‐min intervals from January 2019 to November 2024 (Figure 1a ), one along the mainstem of Chalone Creek (CHA‐4, Figure 2 ) and three on the Sandy Creek tributary (SC‐2, SC‐4, and SC‐5). All wells were located on intermittent reaches except SC‐5. Groundwater levels were measured at CHA‐4, SC‐4, and SC‐5 using Rugged TROLL 100 data loggers, which include an absolute pressure transducer (In‐Situ Inc.). Barometric pressure was recorded at a 15‐min frequency using an In‐Situ Baro TROLL about 0.3 m below the land surface. Groundwater pressure data were processed to remove barometric effects and converted to depth measurements. In SC‐2, groundwater data were collected using a vented pressure transducer (Process Measurement &amp; Controls Inc. Miniature Submersible Depth/Level Transducer model MTM 3211) connected to a Campbell Scientific CR10x datalogger at the land surface. Field visits to download data and manually check groundwater measurements for accuracy using the Solinst 102M Mini Water Level Meter were conducted biannually beginning in 2018. Further information on well specifications can be found in Scheiderich et al. ( 2022 ). FIGURE 1 Study site and time series of long‐term, high‐frequency groundwater data. (a) Map of the four monitoring wells (circles) on Chalone Creek (Pinnacles National Park, California) and their corresponding riparian areas of influence (delineated by color). The CHA well is in the Chalone alluvial area, an intermittent, losing reach. SC wells are in the Sandy Creek alluvial area, where SC‐5 is a perennial, gaining reach. (b) 5‐day Palmer Drought Severity Index (PDSI) and daily precipitation (mm). Color bands indicate corresponding qualitative drought classifications from the National Weather Service. (c) 3 days in September 2021 showing diel water table fluctuations and implementation of the White method to determine the amount of evapotranspiration coming from groundwater (ET gw ). The daily change in storage (S) and the recovery rate (R) are used to calculate ET gw for a 24‐h period ( t ). (d) Water table depth (m) time series at the four monitoring wells. All wells exhibited diel water table fluctuations. Each year, groundwater declines to its deepest point at the end of the dry season and rises with the onset of precipitation. The 2020–22 period captured a historic drought, with water years 2021 and 2022 being the second and third driest on record in California (California Department of Water Resources 2021 , 2022 ). FIGURE 2 The mainstem of Chalone Creek. Photos of Chalone Creek, 600 m downstream of the CHA‐4 well, during (a) the wet season (March) and (b) the dry season (November) of 2024. Photo credit: Rose Mohammadi. When there were gaps in the groundwater time series (average completeness was 80.74%), we used autoregressive integrated moving average models (ARIMA) and a Kalman filter to impute missing values in a way that respected the dominant periodicities, trends, and noise in the time series (Comte et al. 2021 ) using the “forecast” package (Hyndman et al. 2024 ) in R (R Core Team 2021 ). Across the five wells, the root mean square error (RMSE) ranged from 0.018 to 0.208 m, indicating strong agreement between modeled and observed groundwater levels. This process delivered five full years of 15‐min data (January 1, 2020, to December 31, 2024). 2.3. Meteorological Data Collection and Processing Daily mean air temperature (Temp, °C), daily precipitation (Precip, mm), and mean vapor pressure deficit (VPD, kPa) were collected by a weather station in the park (Western Regional Climate Center 2024b ). Accumulated precipitation over the preceding month (Precip_1month, mm) was calculated from the precipitation data. Daily photoperiod (Photo, hours) was retrieved using the U.S. Naval Observatory's “Duration of Daylight/Darkness Table for One Year” (Astronomical Applications Department 2025 ). Palmer Drought Severity Index (PDSI, unitless), a measure of dryness used to monitor droughts that ranges from −10 (dry) to 10 (wet), was sourced from the Gridded Surface Meteorological (gridMET) dataset retrieved from Climate Engine (Abatzoglou 2013 ) (Figure 1b ). PDSI data were reported at 5‐day intervals and were upsampled to a daily frequency via a Kalman filter. 2.4. Vegetation Data and Satellite Image Processing We compiled and processed Analysis‐Ready PlanetScope imagery, a 3‐m orthorectified surface reflectance product, using Planet's API (Planet Labs PBC 2018 ). This imagery's spectral bands and spectral response functions are equivalent to the blue (B2), green (B3), red (B4), and narrow NIR (B8a) bands of Sentinel‐2. All images acquired during the 6‐year study period that had less than 90% cloud cover were included in the study ( n = 746). Images were masked with Planet's usable data mask. We used a random forest classification model, a machine learning algorithm composed of an ensemble of decision trees, to identify deciduous vegetation canopy pixels by species and mask out evergreens, scrub, and bare ground (Breiman 2001 ). We used high‐resolution Google Earth imagery (from February 2021, March 2022, and July 2023) to manually draw 350 polygons (totaling 55,736 pixels) representing tree crowns, scrub and nonwoody vegetation, buildings, roads, and bare ground. The polygons were classified using visual interpretation as well as 100 GPS coordinates taken next to trees along the riparian corridors of the park. The resulting pixels were randomly divided into a training set (75%) and a testing set (25%) to train and validate the model. Bands 1 (coastal blue, 443 nm), 2 (blue, 490 nm), 3 (green I, 531 nm), 4 (green, 565 nm), 5 (yellow, 610 nm), 6 (red, 665 nm), 7 (red edge, 705 nm), and 8 (NIR, 865 nm) from 8‐band PlanetScope imagery acquired in January, March, and November of 2024 were used to train the model. The accuracy of each model was validated with the testing dataset. We ran the random forest model with the “randomForest” package (Liaw and Wiener 2002 ). The resulting model was used to classify pixels belonging to the dominant deciduous riparian tree species in the watershed: Salix laevigata Bebb or Salix lasiolepis Benth. (red and arroyo willow, “willow”), Populus fremontii S. Watson (Fremont cottonwood, “cottonwood”), and Quercus lobata Née (valley oak, “valley oak”). From satellite imagery, the two willow species could not be reliably distinguished, so they were grouped together as “willow.” Training data for willow classification were derived from GPS points located next to mature, tree‐form individuals, and care was taken to exclude shrub‐form willows. All other pixels not classified as one of the three target species, such as the evergreen Quercus agrifolia Née (coast live oak) and Pinus sabiniana Douglas ex Douglas (gray pine), were masked out and excluded from analysis. We calculated NDVI, a metric of vegetation “greenness,” for each deciduous pixel in each image. NDVI (unitless) is calculated using the near‐infrared (NIR) and red (RED) bands: NDVI = NIR − RED NIR + RED NDVI ranges from −1 to 1, with values closer to 1 indicating vegetation with a higher density of green leaves, positive small values (between 0 and 0.20) indicating no vegetation, and negative values denoting the presence of surface water. The daily average NDVI for each tree species within the four study reaches (Figure 1a ) was computed. The resulting 12 time series were smoothed using a weighted HANTS (Harmonic Analysis of NDVI Time Series) smoother in the “phenofit” package (Kong et al. 2022 ). The weighted HANTS algorithm, based on the Fourier transform, reduces noise in NDVI time series by applying a moving support domain to assign weights, thereby determining frequency more easily, resulting in a time series that fits the actual vegetation growth profile (Verhoef 1996 ; Yang et al. 2015 ). After applying the weighted HANTS smoother for rough fitting, growing season division was performed with the “phenofit” package using the threshold method. Where the original vegetation time series is f t , we set the threshold f t ratio to 0.5 and define it as the normalized vegetation time series in the range of [0, 1]: f t ratio = f t − max / max − min . The threshold method defines the start of the growing season (SOS) and end of the growing season (EOS) by the first day when the vegetation index value exceeds and falls below the threshold—here, 50% of the seasonal amplitude—respectively. The growing season length (GSL) is the number of days between the SOS and EOS. 2.4.1. Testing Our Hypotheses We analyzed DTW to test our first hypothesis that riparian trees near the perennial reach rely more heavily on groundwater in the dry summer, while trees near intermittent reaches rely on groundwater year‐round. Specifically, we sought to determine the timing and magnitude of groundwater use by vegetation using wavelet analyses. Wavelet analysis is a time‐series method that decomposes signals to extract dominant frequencies, amplitudes, and phases in the data, as well as any changes in these properties over time (Mallat 1989 ; Torrence and Compo 1998 ). This technique has been increasingly applied in hydrology to identify patterns in groundwater and streamflow time series and link them to ecosystem processes (Yu and Lin 2015 ; Ruhí et al. 2018 ). A significant daily periodicity indicates that riparian vegetation is transpiring groundwater following a diel (24‐h) cycle. We ran wavelets on the longest continuous time series for each well using the “WaveletComp” package (Roesch and Schmidbauer 2018 ). We then horizontally “sliced” each wavelet to extract wavelet power at the daily scale across the entire study period. Using breakpoint analysis in the “changepoint” package (Killick and Eckley 2014 ), we were then able to precisely determine when power at the daily scale fluctuated, pinpointing when trees began and stopped using groundwater. To quantify groundwater use, we then followed the White method (White 1932 ; Loheide et al. 2005 ) to estimate the amount of daily evapotranspiration from groundwater (ET gw , mm/day): ET gw = S y ∆ S t + R where S y is the specific yield (unitless), ∆ S is the daily change in storage (m), t is the time period (24 h), and R is the overnight recovery (or net inflow) rate between 0:00 and 4:00 (m/h). The White method captures water losses from both transpiration (direct water uptake through roots from groundwater or the capillary fringe) as well as evaporation (water loss from the water table which is then transported through the unsaturated zone to the land surface). It relies on four assumptions: (1) plant water use drives diel water table fluctuations, (2) ET is minimal between 0:00 and 4:00, (3) the rate of recharge is constant throughout both day and night, and (4) specific yield can be reliably estimated. Due to assumption 3, we did not quantify ET gw on days that it rained or 3 days following rain. We determined the specific yield at each well using the methods described in Loheide et al. ( 2005 ), relying on soil texture described in Scheiderich et al. ( 2022 ) and DTW. Figure 1 shows the DTW time series (Figure 1d ) and representative diel water table fluctuations and the implementation of the White method (Figure 1c ). To test our second hypothesis—that depth to groundwater and precipitation are the main controls on vegetation greenness (NDVI) across flow regimes and species—we used random forest (RF) regression models. RF models have been used to identify driving forces in vegetation greenness changes (Wang et al. 2022 ; Qiao et al. 2024 ) and understand ecosystem reliance on groundwater (Ruehr et al. 2023 ). Using data from 2020 to 2024, we ran six RF models, each predicting the average NDVI for a specific flow‐species group (e.g., cottonwood by the perennial site or valley oak by intermittent sites), using DTW, temperature (Temp), precipitation (Precip), 1‐month accumulated precipitation (Precip_1month), photoperiod (Photo), and vapor pressure deficit (VPD) as predictors. To assess whether longer antecedent precipitation windows improved model performance, we also calculated 2‐ and 3‐month precipitation lags, as well as 3‐ and 6‐month rolling precipitation sums, in addition to the 1‐month total used in the main analysis. We performed a hyperparameter grid search using the “ranger” package (Wright and Ziegler 2017 ). We evaluated models with 1, 2, or 3 predictors at each node split, as well as a minimum node size of 1, 3, or 5, again selecting the hyperparameter combination with the lowest RMSE. The number of trees for all models was set to 500 and trained on a random 75% sample of the data. We used the “vivid” package (Inglis et al. 2023 ) to estimate variable importance and its interaction effects for each predictor. To test our third hypothesis that drought shortens the growing season by accelerating leaf senescence, with greater effects at intermittent sites, we compared NDVI time series across dry (2020–2022) and wet (2019, 2023, 2024) years, stratified by flow regime and species. To quantify the overall impact of drought on vegetation greenness for each flow regime‐species grouping, we used Welch's t ‐tests to compare NDVI values during the growing season between drought and non‐drought years. Shifts in SOS, EOS, and GSL due to drought were calculated as the difference in phenophase timing between drought and non‐drought years. Statistical significance of these shifts was assessed using generalized linear mixed models (GLMMs) in the “lme4” package (Bates et al. 2015 ). For each phenology metric, we developed two models: a base model with additive effects of species, flow regime, and drought status, and a more complex model that included an interaction term between flow regime and drought status. Site was an additional fixed effect in the SOS model (because of a singular fit) and was a random effect in the EOS and GSL models. We used a likelihood ratio test (LRT) in the “lmtest” package (Zeileis and Hothorn 2002 ) to compare the two models and determine whether the interaction term significantly improved model fit. We then sought to place our findings in a broader ecological context, comparing our results to global observations of drought impacts on phenology sourced from long‐term satellite observations from the Global Inventory Modeling and Mapping Studies (GIMMS) NDVI 3g dataset (1982–2015); ground‐based observational data from the Pan European Phenology Network (PEP725) (1945–2016), the Russian “Chronicles of Nature” Network (RCNN) (1901–2017), and the China Phenological Observation Network (CPON) (1963–2014) (Liu et al. 2025 ); and experimental precipitation manipulations (Lu et al. 2023 ). While these datasets span a wide range of ecosystems and community types, they allow us to assess whether the patterns observed in riparian woodlands are consistent with broader drought‐phenology relationships. We used the Global Aridity Index and Potential Evapotranspiration Database (Zomer et al. 2022 ) to classify observations by aridity class (Humid, Dry Sub‐Humid, Semi‐Arid, Arid, and Hyper Arid), then ran two‐way ANOVAs with phenological shifts (in days) as a function of aridity classification and study type, and post hoc Tukey tests to assess differences in phenological shifts between study types and aridity classes. 3. Results 3.1. Groundwater Use by Riparian Trees Annual water table fluctuations were observed at all wells (Figure 1d ). Water table depths at all wells showed a clear response to precipitation patterns, with maximum depths occurring at the end of dry seasons and rising rapidly with the onset of precipitation events. At the Sandy Creek wells, recharge to the groundwater system occurs when soil moisture is sufficiently high to allow infiltration to reach the water table. In contrast, at the CHA‐4 site on Chalone Creek, large precipitation events can cause rapid infiltration of creek water (Scheiderich et al. 2022 ). The magnitude of response varied across monitoring wells, with SC‐2 consistently showing the largest annual fluctuations (5.4–6.6 m), while the only perennial site, SC‐5, exhibited much more stable conditions (0.5–0.8 m). CHA‐4 displayed an intermediate fluctuation range (4.1–4.9 m). The interannual variation in precipitation and PDSI was strongly associated with groundwater dynamics across all monitoring sites (Figure 1b ). For example, SC‐4 experienced a sharp decline in groundwater depth during the 2020–2022 drought until wet conditions in 2023 recharged the aquifer. Wavelet analysis revealed diel water table fluctuations at all wells. To illustrate the range of responses across the hydrologic gradient, we compared three wells: SC‐5 (perennial), CHA‐4 (intermittent), and SC‐4 (intermittent) (the wavelet from the remaining intermittent well, SC‐2, can be found in Figure S1 ). At SC‐5, wavelet power at the daily period (period = 1) was the strongest from May to November every year, revealing consistent diel fluctuations during the dry season (Figure 3a ). At CHA‐4 and SC‐4, wavelet power at the daily scale was comparatively weaker but persisted longer throughout the year (Figure 3b,c ). FIGURE 3 Timing and magnitude of groundwater use by trees. (a–c) Wavelet diagrams illustrating the power of each frequency in depth to water table data from wells SC‐5 (perennial), CHA‐4 (intermittent), and SC‐4 (intermittent). Warmer colors at the daily scale (period = ~1) indicate when there is a strong evapotranspiration signal. (d–f) Depth to water table (m). (g–i) Estimates of evapotranspiration from groundwater (ET gw ) (mm/day) from the White method are shown for the dry (yellow triangles) and wet (blue circles) seasons. Growing seasons are highlighted in gray. The ET gw patterns at each site corresponded with their dominant vegetation composition (Figure S2 ). At the perennial SC‐5 site, which has an even distribution of evergreen and deciduous trees, the ET gw was strongly seasonal: the average growing season ET gw (0.46 mm/day) was over three times higher than in the nongrowing season (0.12 mm/day). In contrast, at the intermittent CHA‐4 and SC‐4 sites, there is a higher proportion of evergreen coast live oaks, and seasonal patterns in ET gw were muted. At CHA‐4, ET gw was nearly identical during the growing and nongrowing seasons, averaging 0.11 and 0.10 mm/day, respectively. However, at SC‐4, ET gw was lower during the growing season (0.11 mm/day) than during the nongrowing season (0.12 mm/day). These patterns partially supported our hypothesis: at the perennial reach, groundwater use was strongly seasonal and aligned with deciduous phenology, whereas at intermittent reaches, muted seasonality reflected year‐round use. However, the expected seasonal disconnection of shallow‐rooted species from groundwater was less evident, and the relatively consistent baseline ET gw across intermittent sites suggests additional processes beyond evergreen transpiration. 3.2. Patterns in Riparian Greenness and Phenology The NDVI time series for tree species within each well's area of influence exhibited clear seasonal fluctuations, with peak values occurring during the delineated growing seasons (Figure 4a ). However, the magnitude and variability of NDVI differed by tree species and site hydrology. ANOVA analyses and Tukey's HSD post hoc comparisons showed that the perennial site (SC‐5) had significantly greater average growing season NDVI values compared to the three intermittent sites across all species (12%–84% greater for willow, 2%–54% greater for cottonwood, and 2%–26% greater for valley oak; p &lt; 0.001 for all comparisons) (Figure 4b ). SC‐4 consistently displayed the lowest NDVI values across all three species compared to other sites (38%–46% lower for willow, 24%–35% lower for cottonwood, and 17%–20% lower for valley oak; p &lt; 0.001 for all comparisons). FIGURE 4 Normalized Difference Vegetation Index (NDVI) time series and growing season division from satellite imagery. (a) NDVI time series for willow, cottonwood, and valley oak trees within each site (indicated by line color). SC‐5 is the only perennial site among the four, and SC‐4 has the deepest groundwater. The raw average values are plotted in lighter colors, with the weighted HANTS (Harmonic Analysis of NDVI Time Series) smoothed values plotted with darker, thicker lines. Growing seasons delineated using the threshold method are highlighted in gray. (b) Violin and boxplots of smoothed growing season NDVI values binned by site. Letters indicate groupings based on Tukey's HSD test: Different letters denote statistically significant differences ( p &lt; 0.05) between sites. The boxes represent the interquartile range 25th to 75th percentiles, thick lines mark the median, whiskers represent the 5th and 95th percentiles, and outlying points are plotted individually. These results are consistent with our prediction that the perennial site would exhibit greater and more stable greenness. Moreover, this site‐based variation suggests that local hydrology and species‐specific traits may modulate greenness independently of broader seasonal cues. These differences motivated our subsequent analysis of the environmental drivers shaping NDVI dynamics across sites and species. 3.3. Drivers of Riparian Greenness and Phenology The random forest models explained a high proportion of the variance (&gt; 90%) in NDVI around the wells. A sensitivity analysis confirmed that longer precipitation lags and sums offered no significant improvement over the 1‐month variable. Importantly, DTW, photoperiod, and PDSI remained the top predictors across all model variations (Figure S3 ). However, the primary driver of greenness differed distinctly between site types: photoperiod dominated at the perennial site, while DTW was the controlling factor at intermittent sites (Figure 5 ). At the perennial site, all three species exhibited complex interaction networks with multiple influential variables. All species showed strong interactions between photoperiod, DTW, and temperature, with photoperiod having the highest importance. Of the three species at the perennial site, valley oak had more balanced variable importance between photoperiod, PDSI, and DTW. In contrast, species at intermittent sites demonstrated much simpler interaction networks dominated by DTW. Willow and cottonwood showed the strongest DTW influence and DTW–photoperiod interaction, while photoperiod and PDSI were distinctly of secondary importance compared to DTW. In contrast, valley oak at intermittent sites uniquely maintained stronger photoperiod importance alongside DTW compared to the other species, suggesting a more balanced response to both water availability and seasonal light cues. FIGURE 5 Variable importance and variable interaction network plots from random forest models predicting vegetation greenness (Normalized Difference Vegetation Index, NDVI) for perennial and intermittent cottonwood (a, b), valley oak (c, d), and willow (e, f). Higher variable importance (Vimp) is indicated with larger and darker nodes (green). Higher variable interaction strength (Vint) is plotted with thicker and darker lines (blue). These results partially support our hypothesis regarding the importance of DTW for vegetation greenness. Specifically, while photoperiod emerged as the dominant driver of greenness at the perennial site where water availability was stable, this primary phenological control was supplanted by DTW at intermittent sites. 3.4. Influence of Drought Historic drought conditions between 2020 and 2022 were associated with lower NDVI values across all species and both flow regimes (Figure 6a ). Welch's t ‐tests showed this difference was significant for cottonwood (perennial: t 1185 = −12.50, p &lt; 0.0001; intermittent: t 3529 = −8.41, p &lt; 0.0001), willow (perennial: t 1232 = −15.03, p &lt; 0.0001; t 3594 = −7.32, p &lt; 0.0001), and valley oak (perennial: t 1223 = −12.17, p &lt; 0.0001; intermittent: t 3275 = −12.60, p &lt; 0.0001). Willow experienced the greatest NDVI declines under drought conditions (−4.88% for intermittent and −4.78% for perennial), followed by cottonwood (−4.74% for intermittent and −4.09% for perennial), and valley oak (−4.50% for intermittent and −3.84% for perennial). FIGURE 6 Impacts of drought on growing season Normalized Difference Vegetation Index (NDVI) and phenology. (a) Violin and boxplots of smoothed growing season NDVI values (see Section 2 for details) for each tree species binned by flow regime and drought (2020–2022) and non‐drought (2019, 2023, 2024) years. Boxes represent the interquartile range from the 25th to 75th percentiles, thick lines mark the median, whiskers represent the 5th and 95th percentiles, and outlying points are plotted individually. (b) Average growing start of season (SOS) and end of season (EOS) for each tree species binned by flow regime and drought (2020–2022) and non‐drought (2019, 2023, 2024) years. Dots represent the mean, and whiskers are +/− one standard deviation from the mean. Our analysis also revealed phenological shifts across all three riparian tree species in response to drought, with notable differences between perennial and intermittent flow regimes (Figure 6b ). For the SOS, the likelihood ratio test revealed that the interaction between flow regime and drought status was not significant ( χ 2 (1) = 0.34, p = 0.56), indicating that drought effects on SOS were consistent across both flow regimes. The model confirmed that drought significantly delayed SOS across all species ( p &lt; 0.001). At the perennial site, the average delay for cottonwood, willow, and valley oak was 6.7, 11.3, and 8.7 days, respectively. At intermittent sites, the delay was 10.9, 2.2, and 7.1 days for cottonwood, willow, and valley oak, respectively. For the EOS, a likelihood ratio test showed that the interaction between flow regime and drought status was marginally significant ( χ 2 (1) = 10.59, p = 0.001). This indicates that the effect of drought on EOS was different between the perennial and intermittent flow regimes. At the perennial site, timing remained relatively stable, with minimal changes between drought and non‐drought conditions (on average, valley oak EOS was delayed by 2.3 days, cottonwood EOS advanced by an average of 0.3 days, and there was no change in willow EOS). Notably, trees at intermittent sites displayed more pronounced responses to drought. All three species in intermittent flow regimes showed substantially earlier EOS during drought conditions: cottonwood by 34.1 days, willow by 22.4 days, and valley oak by 22.4 days. These shifts resulted in significant changes to growing season length. A likelihood ratio test confirmed that the effect of drought on growing season length (GSL) was significantly dependent on the flow regime ( χ 2 (1) = 10.32, p = 0.0013). In perennial systems, the growing season was shortened during drought by 7.1, 11.3, and 6.2 days for cottonwood, willow, and valley oak, respectively. The effect was more pronounced in intermittent systems, where the growing season contracted by 37.3, 16.7, and 27.5 days for the same species. Drought‐induced phenological shifts documented in this study, particularly at intermittent sites, tended to be greater than those observed in other ecosystems (Figure 7 ). All ecosystems experienced a delay in SOS, with differences across study type–aridity classes ( F [15,794279] = 92.39, p &lt; 0.0001). However, the delayed SOS at intermittent and perennial sites was not significantly different compared to other ecosystems. EOS shifts showed significant variation across study type–aridity classes ( F [5,172] = 11.26, p &lt; 0.0001), with intermittent sites experiencing the most substantial advancements ( p &lt; 0.05 for all comparisons). Similarly, GSL changes differed significantly across study type–aridity classes ( F [4,69] = 13.21, p &lt; 0.0001), with intermittent sites again exhibiting the most dramatic reductions ( p &lt; 0.05 for all comparisons). FIGURE 7 Comparison of drought‐induced phenological shifts across study types and ecosystems. We compared our values on tree phenological shifts in response to drought to observational and experimental values from the literature ( n = 7,077,557). Box and violin plots show changes in (a) start of season, (b) end of season, and (c) growing season length, expressed as shifts in days. Colors represent different datasets: intermittent (orange) and perennial (blue) vegetation from this study; long‐term satellite observations from the Global Inventory Modeling and Mapping Studies (GIMMS) NDVI 3g dataset (1982–2015) (green; Liu et al. 2025 ); ground‐based observational data (purple), including the Pan European Phenology Network (PEP725) (1945–2016), the Russian “Chronicles of Nature” Network (RCNN) (1901–2017), and the China Phenological Observation Network (CPON) (1963–2014), as compiled in Liu et al. ( 2025 ); and experimental precipitation manipulations (magenta; Lu et al. 2023 ). Boxplots represent interquartile ranges, medians, and 5th and 95th percentiles. The dashed vertical line marks a zero shift (i.e., no change). Sample sizes ( n ) indicate the number of observations per group. These findings strongly support our hypothesis that drought shortens the growing season primarily by accelerating leaf senescence, with this effect being substantially more pronounced at intermittent sites compared to perennial ones. The magnitude of phenological shifts (up to ~37 days) is consistent with our prediction that dryland riparian ecosystems would be particularly sensitive to drought conditions due to their heavy reliance on groundwater, which fluctuated widely with drought intensity and duration. 4. Discussion This study examined how riparian trees in perennial and intermittent reaches use groundwater and respond to drought. At the perennial reach, evapotranspiration from groundwater followed a seasonal pattern linked with deciduous trees' phenology, while at intermittent reaches it remained relatively constant. Photoperiod controlled greenness at the perennial site, whereas DTW dominated at intermittent ones. Drought reduced NDVI and growing season length across all sites, with intermittent reaches showing the most significant shifts. These results highlight the vulnerability of riparian trees by intermittent streams to drought and underscore the importance of understanding riparian resilience under increasingly variable hydroclimates. 4.1. Flow Regime and Riparian Species Composition Controls Groundwater Uptake Our results suggest that there are two central controls governing groundwater use by riparian trees: flow regime determines its accessibility, while the tree species identity determines the timing and magnitude of its use. At the perennial site, shallow groundwater is readily accessible to the entire community, from shallow‐rooted cottonwoods and willows (0.8–2.79 m; Shafroth et al. 2000 ; Stover et al. 2018 ; Stromberg 2013 ; Rohde et al. 2024 ) to deep‐rooted valley oaks (8.66 m; Rohde et al. 2024 ) and coast live oaks (10.7 m; Canadell et al. 1996 ). As groundwater is non‐limiting, the ET gw signal is dominated by deciduous tree phenology, resulting in a &gt; 3× increase in water use during the growing season. Conversely, at intermittent sites, rooting depth is the critical trait. The consistent year‐round ET gw (~0.11 mm/day) at both intermittent sites, despite differences in evergreen cover, suggests that evergreen transpiration is not the only driver. When the water tables are shallow in the winter, part of the apparent ET gw likely reflects groundwater‐coupled evaporation and herbaceous transpiration from the vadose zone, which remains hydraulically connected to groundwater via the capillary fringe. The White method can capture up to 28% of vadose zone water use in sandy soils because extraction from shallow unsaturated layers depresses the water table through a reversed hydraulic gradient (Loheide et al. 2005 ). Thus, winter ET gw likely represents a combination of coast live oak transpiration and groundwater‐supported soil and herbaceous fluxes. As the growing season progresses and the herbaceous layer senesces, coast live oaks, which maintain significant transpiration throughout the year (Hollinger 1992 ), remain the dominant groundwater users. Paradoxically, at SC‐4, ET gw was lower in the growing season than the nongrowing season, possibly due to drought‐induced stomatal closure in coast live oaks (Pivovaroff et al. 2018 ). The differential groundwater use has profound implications, as climate change may cause perennial reaches to transition to intermittent flow (Zipper et al. 2021 ; Ayers et al. 2024 ; Carlson et al. 2024 ). Our findings suggest this shift would transform the water‐use patterns. Specifically, trees adapted to perennial conditions would face significant physiological stress and potentially mortality when forced to adopt intermittent‐type strategies under reduced dry‐season groundwater access. This could trigger a demographic shift toward deep‐rooted, drought‐tolerant species like coast live oak that are better suited to the new hydrologic regime (Chacon et al. 2020 ). 4.2. Flow Regime Mediates Drivers of Riparian Tree Phenology DTW, PDSI, and photoperiod were the primary drivers of riparian vegetation greenness across all studied species, though the importance of these factors varied between flow regimes. At the perennial site, photoperiod was the dominant predictor of greenness, whereby phenological patterns primarily follow seasonal light cues. Photoperiod is a well‐documented driver of plant (Piao et al. 2019 ) and dryland riparian vegetation phenology (McMahon et al. 2024 ). In cottonwoods, growth cessation is triggered in part by the reduction of day length below a critical photoperiod (Pauley and Perry 1954 ; Friedman et al. 2011 ). Despite photoperiod's importance, the complex variable interaction networks observed at the perennial sites indicate that these trees also respond to other environmental variables, including PDSI, DTW, temperature, and accumulated precipitation. At intermittent sites, DTW largely controlled vegetation greenness, interacting strongly with PDSI and photoperiod. This aligns with findings that late‐season precipitation and groundwater availability are key to maintaining riparian greenness (Lochin et al. 2024 ), which is consistent with the well‐known dependence of riparian vegetation on groundwater (Stromberg et al. 1996 ; Pettit and Froend 2018 ; Rohde et al. 2021 ; Williams et al. 2022 ). Moreover, the importance of DTW depended on species' groundwater reliance; more obligate phreatophytes like willow and cottonwood were the most sensitive, while more drought‐tolerant valley oak had a more balanced response to both water availability and seasonal cues. A strong interaction emerged between DTW and PDSI, which represent different physical and temporal scales of water availability that influence riparian vegetation in complementary ways. DTW captures seasonal groundwater fluctuations linked to annual hydrological cycles as well as the flow regime. Moreover, it directly reflects the immediate physical constraint on root water access. PDSI incorporates antecedent and current moisture supply (e.g., precipitation) and demand (e.g., potential evapotranspiration). In particular, PDSI can correlate with soil moisture content 0.9–1 m below ground (Wang et al. 2015 ). Together, DTW and PDSI reflect root‐zone soil moisture conditions. Thus, their interaction suggests that riparian vegetation responds both to immediate groundwater access as well as to unsaturated zone soil moisture. While previous studies have found that tree growth in dryland riparian systems is heavily influenced by local hydrology (Sargeant and Singer 2021 ; Williams et al. 2022 ), our findings highlight the importance of hydrological sensitivity across multiple scales. 4.3. Drought Lowers Greenness and Leads to an Earlier End of the Growing Season Extended drought conditions (2020–2022) triggered asymmetric phenological responses—delayed spring leaf‐out but accelerated autumn senescence—which resulted in significantly shortened growing seasons, particularly at intermittent sites (up to 37 days). The SOS delay may stem from two interconnected consequences of drought: warmer winter temperatures likely inhibited the fulfillment of chilling requirements for overcoming winter endodormancy (which has been documented in Salicaceae; Perry et al. 2020 ), while low pre‐season water availability may have constrained the ability of trees to initiate leaf‐out (Liu et al. 2025 ). The EOS delay suggests that trees at intermittent sites precociously shed their leaves to maintain more stable leaf water potentials and avoid hydraulic failure (Rood et al. 2000 ; Nolan et al. 2017 ; Wu et al. 2022 ). While all sites experienced an earlier EOS, this trend was most pronounced around well SC‐4, where DTW fell to 11.6 m during the multiyear drought, a depth far exceeding published maximum rooting depths for trees in this study. This plastic response at intermittent sites allows survival but carries the cost of limiting carbon assimilation, potentially reducing growth and leading to carbon starvation. While this drought‐avoidance (isohydric) strategy may help prevent immediate hydraulic damage, it may also reduce long‐term fitness. In contrast, at the perennial site, groundwater never declined below 3.5 m, providing relatively constant access to water, thereby buffering trees from the most severe drought stress (Naumburg et al. 2005 ; Warter et al. 2023 ). Nevertheless, all trees also experienced moderate declines (~4%–5%) in growing‐season NDVI, a proxy for photosynthetic activity and potential carbon gain, suggesting that neither perennial nor intermittent trees could fully escape drought conditions. This observation underscores a central trade‐off, particularly at intermittent sites: plasticity allows survival under stress but may do so at the expense of long‐term productivity and resilience (Valladares et al. 2007 ; Vázquez et al. 2017 ). 5. Conclusion Riparian trees in dryland intermittent stream ecosystems have been shaped by exposure to drought over evolutionary timescales and possess adaptations to persist during periods of low water availability (Lytle and Poff 2004 ; McDowell et al. 2008 ; Matesanz et al. 2010 ). However, plants in water‐limited ecosystems are often already operating near physiological limits and may be highly responsive to additional climate variability (Munson et al. 2021 ; Moran et al. 2023 ). Our study confirms this vulnerability, showing that riparian trees along intermittent stream reaches respond to drought by curtailing their growing season via precocious leaf senescence. We found these responses differed between flow regimes. Indeed, during drought years, intermittent sites exhibited significantly greater EOS advancement and shortened GSL compared not only to perennial sites in this study but also to patterns observed across multiple datasets. These findings suggest that groundwater access is a critical factor driving these responses: trees by intermittent sites may be unable to reach deep groundwater, while trees at the perennial site benefit from a relatively shallow and stable water table even during dry summers (Kibler et al. 2021 ; Williams et al. 2022 ). This heightened sensitivity also suggests these ecosystems may be operating very close to critical groundwater thresholds, making them particularly susceptible to hydrological change. With intermittent streams comprising approximately 60% of river miles globally (Messager et al. 2021 ) and over 81% in the arid and semi‐arid American Southwest (Levick et al. 2008 ), vast areas of riparian woodland habitat may face underappreciated risk (Moran et al. 2023 ). As non‐perennial conditions are increasing in prevalence due to climate change (Zipper et al. 2021 ; Ayers et al. 2024 ; Carlson et al. 2024 ), trees adapted to stable groundwater conditions may struggle to adjust, increasing the risk of physiological stress and mortality (Valladares et al. 2007 ). Our results highlight the need to consider flow regime shifts in predicting dryland riparian woodland resilience and underscore the importance of groundwater availability in shaping ecosystem responses to drought. Author Contributions Rose M. Mohammadi: conceptualization, data curation, formal analysis, funding acquisition, investigation, methodology, project administration, visualization, writing – original draft. Todd E. Dawson: conceptualization, writing – review and editing. Claire R. Tiedeman: data curation, investigation, resources, writing – review and editing. John C. Stella: writing – review and editing. Albert Ruhí: conceptualization, funding acquisition, methodology, project administration, supervision, writing – review and editing. Conflicts of Interest The authors declare no conflicts of interest. Supporting information Figure S1: Timing and magnitude of groundwater use by trees. (a) Wavelet diagrams illustrating the power of each frequency in depth to water table (DTW) data from well SC‐2 (intermittent). Warmer colors at the daily scale (period = ~1) indicate when there is a strong evapotranspiration signal. (b) Depth to water table (m). (c) Estimates of evapotranspiration from groundwater (ET gw ) (mm/day) from the White method are shown for the dry (yellow triangles) and wet (blue circles) seasons. Growing seasons are highlighted in gray. Figure S2: Riparian tree species composition at the four monitoring sites. The bar charts show the total canopy area (m 2 ) for each tree species within a 100‐m radius of the monitoring wells at (a) the perennial site (SC‐5) and (b–d) the intermittent sites (CHA‐4, SC‐2, and SC‐4). Note the high abundance of deciduous species (valley oak, cottonwood) at the perennial site, compared to the higher proportion of evergreen species (coast live oak) at the intermittent sites. Figure S3: Variable importance rankings for random forest models predicting NDVI using alternative precipitation covariates, including 1‐, 2‐, and 3‐month precipitation lags and 3‐ and 6‐month accumulated precipitation sums. Acknowledgments This study was supported by a National Science Foundation (NSF) CAREER award to A.R. (DEB‐2047324) and by the Miller Institute for Basic Research in Science, UC Berkeley. R.M.M. received funding from the NSF Graduate Research Fellowship Program. This study was conducted on the ancestral lands of the Amah Mutsun and Chalon peoples. We thank the staff of Pinnacles National Park, particularly Wildlife Biologist Paul G. Johnson. Mohammadi, R. M. , Dawson T. E., Tiedeman C. R., Stella J. C., and Ruhí A.. 2025. “Groundwater and Remotely Sensed Phenology Reveal Vulnerability of Riparian Trees to Drought.” Global Change Biology 31, no. 10: e70564. 10.1111/gcb.70564. Funding: This work was supported by the Miller Institute for Basic Research in Science, UC Berkeley; Division of Environmental Biology (DEB‐2047324); and National Science Foundation Graduate Research Fellowship Program. Data Availability Statement The data that support the findings of this study are openly available in the Dryad Digital Repository at https://doi.org/10.5061/dryad.cjsxksnj7 . References Abatzoglou, J. T. 2013. “Development of Gridded Surface Meteorological Data for Ecological Applications and Modelling.” International Journal of Climatology 33, no. 1: 121–131. 10.1002/joc.3413. Astronomical Applications Department . 2025. Duration of Daylight/Darkness Table for One Year. U.S. Naval Observatory, U.S. Navy. https://aa.usno.navy.mil/data/Dur_OneYear . Ayers, J. R. , Yarnell S. M., Baruch E., Lusardi R. A., and Grantham T. E.. 2024. “Perennial and Non‐Perennial Streamflow Regime Shifts Across California, USA.” Water Resources Research 60, no. 4: e2023WR035768. 10.1029/2023WR035768. Bates, D. , Mächler M., Bolker B., and Walker S.. 2015. “Fitting Linear Mixed‐Effects Models Using lme4.” Journal of Statistical Software 67, no. 1: 1–48. 10.18637/jss.v067.i01. Bogan, M. T. , Chester E. T., Datry T., et al. 2017. “Chapter 4.8—Resistance, Resilience, and Community Recovery in Intermittent Rivers and Ephemeral Streams.” In Intermittent Rivers and Ephemeral Streams, edited by Datry T., Bonada N., and Boulton A., 349–376. Academic Press. 10.1016/B978-0-12-803835-2.00013-9. Breiman, L. 2001. “Random Forests.” Machine Learning 45: 5–32. 10.1023/a:1010933404324. California Department of Water Resources . 2021. Water Year 2021: An Extreme Year. California Natural Resources Agency. California Department of Water Resources . 2022. Water Year 2022: The Drought Continues. California Natural Resources Agency. Canadell, J. , Jackson R. B., Ehleringer J. B., Mooney H. A., Sala O. E., and Schulze E. D.. 1996. “Maximum Rooting Depth of Vegetation Types at the Global Scale.” Oecologia 108, no. 4: 583–595. 10.1007/bf00329030. Carlson, S. M. , Ruhí A., Bogan M. T., et al. 2024. “Losing Flow in Free‐Flowing Mediterranean‐Climate Streams.” Frontiers in Ecology and the Environment 22, no. 5: e2737. 10.1002/fee.2737. Cartwright, J. M. , Dwire K. A., Freed Z., et al. 2020. “Oases of the Future? Springs as Potential Hydrologic Refugia in Drying Climates.” Frontiers in Ecology and the Environment 18, no. 5: 245–253. 10.1002/fee.2191. Chacon, A. I. , Baer A., Wheeler J. K., and Pittermann J.. 2020. “Two Coastal Pacific Evergreens, Arbutus menziesii , Pursh. and Quercus agrifolia , Née Show Little Water Stress During California's Exceptional Drought.” PLoS One 15, no. 4: e0230868. 10.1371/journal.pone.0230868. Cleland, E. E. , Chuine I., Menzel A., Mooney H. A., and Schwartz M. D.. 2007. “Shifting Plant Phenology in Response to Global Change.” Trends in Ecology &amp; Evolution 22, no. 7: 357–365. 10.1016/j.tree.2007.04.003. Comte, L. , Olden J. D., Tedesco P. A., Ruhí A., and Giam X.. 2021. “Climate and Land‐Use Changes Interact to Drive Long‐Term Reorganization of Riverine Fish Communities Globally.” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 118, no. 27: e2011639118. 10.1073/pnas.2011639118. Datry, T. , Pella H., Leigh C., Bonada N., and Hugueny B.. 2016. “A Landscape Approach to Advance Intermittent River Ecology.” Freshwater Biology 61, no. 8: 1200–1213. 10.1111/fwb.12645. Dettinger, M. 2011. “Climate Change, Atmospheric Rivers, and Floods in California – A Multimodel Analysis of Storm Frequency and Magnitude Changes.” JAWRA Journal of the American Water Resources Association 47, no. 3: 514–523. 10.1111/j.1752-1688.2011.00546.x. D'Odorico, P. , Caylor K., Okin G. S., and Scanlon T. M.. 2007. “On Soil Moisture–Vegetation Feedbacks and Their Possible Effects on the Dynamics of Dryland Ecosystems.” Journal of Geophysical Research – Biogeosciences 112, no. G4: 2006JG000379. 10.1029/2006JG000379. Doody, T. M. , Gao S., Vervoort W., et al. 2023. “A River Basin Spatial Model to Quantitively Advance Understanding of Riverine Tree Response Dynamics to Water Availability and Hydrological Management.” Journal of Environmental Management 332: 117393. 10.1016/j.jenvman.2023.117393. Elmore, A. J. , Manning S. J., Mustard J. F., and Craine J. M.. 2006. “Decline in Alkali Meadow Vegetation Cover in California: The Effects of Groundwater Extraction and Drought.” Journal of Applied Ecology 43, no. 4: 770–779. 10.1111/j.1365-2664.2006.01197.x. Flanagan, L. B. , Orchard T. E., Tremel T. N., and Rood S. B.. 2019. “Using Stable Isotopes to Quantify Water Sources for Trees and Shrubs in a Riparian Cottonwood Ecosystem in Flood and Drought Years.” Hydrological Processes 33, no. 24: 3070–3083. 10.1002/hyp.13560. Friedman, J. M. , Roelle J. E., and Cade B. S.. 2011. “Genetic and Environmental Influences on Leaf Phenology and Cold Hardiness of Native and Introduced Riparian Trees.” International Journal of Biometeorology 55, no. 6: 775–787. 10.1007/s00484-011-0494-6. Gou, S. , and Miller G.. 2014. “A Groundwater–Soil–Plant–Atmosphere Continuum Approach for Modelling Water Stress, Uptake, and Hydraulic Redistribution in Phreatophytic Vegetation.” Ecohydrology 7, no. 3: 1029–1041. 10.1002/eco.1427. Hollinger, D. Y. 1992. “Leaf and Simulated Whole‐Canopy Photosynthesis in Two Co‐Occurring Tree Species.” Ecology 73, no. 1: 1–14. 10.2307/1938716. Hultine, K. R. , Froend R., Blasini D., Bush S. E., Karlinski M., and Koepke D. F.. 2020. “Hydraulic Traits That Buffer Deep‐Rooted Plants From Changes in Hydrology and Climate.” Hydrological Processes 34, no. 2: 209–222. 10.1002/hyp.13587. Huntington, J. , McGwire K., Morton C., et al. 2016. “Assessing the Role of Climate and Resource Management on Groundwater Dependent Ecosystem Changes in Arid Environments With the Landsat Archive.” Remote Sensing of Environment 185: 186–197. 10.1016/j.rse.2016.07.004. Hyndman, R. , Athanasopoulos G., Bergmeir C., et al. 2024. “forecast: Forecasting Functions for Time Series and Linear Models.” R Package Version 8.23.0. 10.32614/cran.package.forecast. Inglis, A. , Parnell A., and Hurley C.. 2023. “Vivid: An R Package for Variable Importance and Variable Interactions Displays for Machine Learning Models.” R Journal 15, no. 2: 344–361. 10.32614/rj-2023-054. Karrenberg, S. , Edwards P. J., and Kollmann J.. 2002. “The Life History of Salicaceae Living in the Active Zone of Floodplains.” Freshwater Biology 47, no. 4: 733–748. 10.1046/j.1365-2427.2002.00894.x. Kibler, C. L. , Schmidt E. C., Roberts D. A., et al. 2021. “A Brown Wave of Riparian Woodland Mortality Following Groundwater Declines During the 2012–2019 California Drought.” Environmental Research Letters 16, no. 8: 084030. 10.1088/1748-9326/ac1377. Killick, R. , and Eckley I. A.. 2014. “Changepoint: An R Package for Changepoint Analysis.” Journal of Statistical Software 58, no. 3: 1–19. 10.18637/jss.v058.i03. Kong, D. , McVicar T. R., Xiao M., et al. 2022. “Phenofit: An R Package for Extracting Vegetation Phenology From Time Series Remote Sensing.” Methods in Ecology and Evolution 13, no. 7: 1508–1527. 10.1111/2041-210x.13870. Levick, L. R. , Goodrich D. C., Hernandez M., et al. 2008. The Ecological and Hydrological Significance of Ephemeral and Intermittent Streams in the Arid and Semi‐Arid American Southwest. US Environmental Protection Agency, Office of Research and Development. EPA/600/R‐08/134, ARS/233046. Liaw, A. , and Wiener M.. 2002. “Classification and Regression by randomForest.” R News 2, no. 3: 18–22. Liu, Y. , Zhang Y., Peñuelas J., et al. 2025. “Drought Legacies Delay Spring Green‐Up in Northern Ecosystems.” Nature Climate Change 15: 444–451. 10.1038/s41558-025-02273-6. Lochin, P. , Piégay H., Stella J. C., Caylor K. K., Vaudor L., and Bliss Singer M.. 2024. “Drivers of Spatiotemporal Patterns of Riparian Forest NDVI Along a Hydroclimatic Gradient.” Ecohydrology 18, no. 2: e2729. 10.1002/eco.2729. Loheide, S. P. , Butler J. J., and Gorelick S. M.. 2005. “Estimation of Groundwater Consumption by Phreatophytes Using Diurnal Water Table Fluctuations: A Saturated‐Unsaturated Flow Assessment.” Water Resources Research 41, no. 7: W07414. 10.1029/2005WR003942. Lu, C. , Zhang J., Min X., et al. 2023. “Contrasting Responses of Early‐ and Late‐Season Plant Phenophases to Altered Precipitation.” Oikos 2023, no. 5: e09829. 10.1111/oik.09829. Lytle, D. A. , and Poff N. L.. 2004. “Adaptation to Natural Flow Regimes.” Trends in Ecology &amp; Evolution 19, no. 2: 94–100. 10.1016/j.tree.2003.10.002. Mallat, S. G. 1989. “A Theory for Multiresolution Signal Decomposition: The Wavelet Representation.” IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence 11, no. 7: 674–693. 10.1109/34.192463. Matesanz, S. , Gianoli E., and Valladares F.. 2010. “Global Change and the Evolution of Phenotypic Plasticity in Plants.” Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences 1206, no. 1: 35–55. 10.1111/j.1749-6632.2010.05704.x. McDowell, N. , Pockman W. T., Allen C. D., et al. 2008. “Mechanisms of Plant Survival and Mortality During Drought: Why Do Some Plants Survive While Others Succumb to Drought?” New Phytologist 178, no. 4: 719–739. 10.1111/j.1469-8137.2008.02436.x. McDowell, N. G. , Sapes G., Pivovaroff A., et al. 2022. “Mechanisms of Woody‐Plant Mortality Under Rising Drought, CO 2 and Vapour Pressure Deficit.” Nature Reviews Earth and Environment 3, no. 5: 294–308. 10.1038/s43017-022-00272-1. McMahon, C. A. , Roberts D. A., Stella J. C., Trugman A. T., Singer M. B., and Caylor K. K.. 2024. “A River Runs Through It: Robust Automated Mapping of Riparian Woodlands and Land Surface Phenology Across Dryland Regions.” Remote Sensing of Environment 305: 114056. 10.1016/j.rse.2024.114056. Menzel, A. , Sparks T. H., Estrella N., and Roy D. B.. 2006. “Altered Geographic and Temporal Variability in Phenology in Response to Climate Change.” Global Ecology and Biogeography 15, no. 5: 498–504. 10.1111/j.1466-8238.2006.00247.x. Messager, M. L. , Lehner B., Cockburn C., et al. 2021. “Global Prevalence of Non‐Perennial Rivers and Streams.” Nature 594, no. 7863: 391–397. 10.1038/s41586-021-03565-5. Moran, M. E. , Aparecido L. M. T., Koepke D. F., et al. 2023. “Limits of Thermal and Hydrological Tolerance in a Foundation Tree Species ( Populus fremontii ) in the Desert Southwestern United States.” New Phytologist 240, no. 6: 2298–2311. 10.1111/nph.19247. Munson, S. M. , Bradford J. B., and Hultine K. R.. 2021. “An Integrative Ecological Drought Framework to Span Plant Stress to Ecosystem Transformation.” Ecosystems 24, no. 4: 739–754. 10.1007/s10021-020-00555-y. Naumburg, E. , Mata‐Gonzalez R., Hunter R. G., McLendon T., and Martin D. W.. 2005. “Phreatophytic Vegetation and Groundwater Fluctuations: A Review of Current Research and Application of Ecosystem Response Modeling With an Emphasis on Great Basin Vegetation.” Environmental Management 35, no. 6: 726–740. 10.1007/s00267-004-0194-7. Nolan, R. H. , Tarin T., Santini N. S., McAdam S. A. M., Ruman R., and Eamus D.. 2017. “Differences in Osmotic Adjustment, Foliar Abscisic Acid Dynamics, and Stomatal Regulation Between an Isohydric and Anisohydric Woody Angiosperm During Drought.” Plant, Cell &amp; Environment 40, no. 12: 3122–3134. 10.1111/pce.13077. Orellana, F. , Verma P., Loheide S. P., and Daly E.. 2012. “Monitoring and Modeling Water‐Vegetation Interactions in Groundwater‐Dependent Ecosystems.” Reviews of Geophysics 50, no. 3: 2011RG000383. 10.1029/2011rg000383. Palmer, M. , and Ruhí A.. 2019. “Linkages Between Flow Regime, Biota, and Ecosystem Processes: Implications for River Restoration.” Science 365, no. 6459: eaaw2087. 10.1126/science.aaw2087. Pauley, S. S. , and Perry T. O.. 1954. “Ecotypic Variation of the Photoperiodic Response in Populus .” Journal of the Arnold Arboretum 35, no. 2: 167–188. 10.5962/p.185976. Perry, L. G. , Shafroth P. B., Hay L. E., Markstrom S. L., and Bock A. R.. 2020. “Projected Warming Disrupts the Synchrony of Riparian Seed Release and Snowmelt Streamflow.” New Phytologist 225, no. 2: 693–712. 10.1111/nph.16191. Pettit, N. E. , and Froend R. H.. 2018. “How Important Is Groundwater Availability and Stream Perenniality to Riparian and Floodplain Tree Growth?” Hydrological Processes 32, no. 10: 1502–1514. 10.1002/hyp.11510. Piao, S. , Liu Q., Chen A., et al. 2019. “Plant Phenology and Global Climate Change: Current Progresses and Challenges.” Global Change Biology 25, no. 6: 1922–1940. 10.1111/gcb.14619. Pivovaroff, A. L. , Cook V. M. W., and Santiago L. S.. 2018. “Stomatal Behaviour and Stem Xylem Traits Are Coordinated for Woody Plant Species Under Exceptional Drought Conditions.” Plant, Cell &amp; Environment 41, no. 11: 2617–2626. 10.1111/pce.13367. Planet Labs PBC . 2018. “Planet Application Program Interface: In Space for Life on Earth.” Planet. https://api.planet.com . Qiao, N. , Wang H., Li Y., and Wang L.. 2024. “Comparative Impact of Fog and Rainfall on Vegetation in a Foggy Desert.” Geophysical Research Letters 51, no. 20: e2024GL110562. 10.1029/2024gl110562. Quichimbo, E. A. , Singer M. B., and Cuthbert M. O.. 2020. “Characterising Groundwater–Surface Water Interactions in Idealised Ephemeral Stream Systems.” Hydrological Processes 34, no. 18: 3792–3806. 10.1002/hyp.13847. R Core Team . 2021. R: A Language and Environment for Statistical Computing. R Foundation for Statistical Computing. https://www.R‐project.org/ . Rodriguez‐Iturbe, I. 2000. “Ecohydrology: A Hydrologic Perspective of Climate‐Soil‐Vegetation Dynamics.” Water Resources Research 36, no. 1: 3–9. 10.1029/1999wr900210. Roesch, A. , and Schmidbauer H.. 2018. “WaveletComp: Computational Wavelet Analysis. R Package Version 1.1.” https://CRAN.R‐project.org/package=WaveletComp . Rohde, M. M. , Stella J. C., Roberts D. A., and Singer M. B.. 2021. “Groundwater Dependence of Riparian Woodlands and the Disrupting Effect of Anthropogenically Altered Streamflow.” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 118, no. 25: e2026453118. 10.1073/pnas.2026453118. Rohde, M. M. , Stella J. C., Singer M. B., Roberts D. A., Caylor K. K., and Albano C. M.. 2024. “Establishing Ecological Thresholds and Targets for Groundwater Management.” Nature Water 2, no. 4: 312–323. 10.1038/s44221-024-00221-w. Rood, S. B. , Braatne J. H., and Hughes F. M.. 2003. “Ecophysiology of Riparian Cottonwoods: Stream Flow Dependency, Water Relations and Restoration.” Tree Physiology 23, no. 16: 1113–1124. 10.1093/treephys/23.16.1113. Rood, S. B. , Patiño S., Coombs K., and Tyree M. T.. 2000. “Branch Sacrifice: Cavitation‐Associated Drought Adaptation of Riparian Cottonwoods.” Trees 14: 248–257. 10.1007/s004680050010. Ruehr, S. , Girotto M., Verfaillie J. G., Baldocchi D., Cabon A., and Keenan T. F.. 2023. “Ecosystem Groundwater Use Enhances Carbon Assimilation and Tree Growth in a Semi‐Arid Oak Savanna.” Agricultural and Forest Meteorology 342: 109725. 10.1016/j.agrformet.2023.109725. Ruhí, A. , Dong X., McDaniel C. H., Batzer D. P., and Sabo J. L.. 2018. “Detrimental Effects of a Novel Flow Regime on the Functional Trajectory of an Aquatic Invertebrate Metacommunity.” Global Change Biology 24, no. 8: 3749–3765. 10.1111/gcb.14133. Sabo, J. L. , Sponseller R., Dixon M., et al. 2005. “Riparian Zones Increase Regional Species Richness by Harboring Different, Not More, Species.” Ecology 86, no. 1: 56–62. 10.1890/04-0668. Sargeant, C. I. , and Singer M. B.. 2016. “Sub‐Annual Variability in Historical Water Source Use by Mediterranean Riparian Trees.” Ecohydrology 9, no. 7: 1328–1345. 10.1002/eco.1730. Sargeant, C. I. , and Singer M. B.. 2021. “Local and Non‐local Controls on Seasonal Variations in Water Availability and Use by Riparian Trees Along a Hydroclimatic Gradient.” Environmental Research Letters 16, no. 8: 084018. 10.1088/1748-9326/ac1294. Scheiderich, K. , Tiedeman C. R., and Hsieh P. A.. 2022. “Aqueous Geochemistry of Waters and Hydrogeology of Alluvial Deposits, Pinnacles National Park, California: U.S. Geological Survey Open‐File Report 2022–1026.” 10.3133/ofr20221026. Shafroth, P. B. , Stromberg J. C., and Patten D. T.. 2000. “Woody Riparian Vegetation Response to Different Alluvial Water Table Regimes.” Western North American Naturalist 60, no. 1: 66–76. Snyder, K. A. , and Williams D. G.. 2000. “Water Sources Used by Riparian Trees Varies Among Stream Types on the San Pedro River, Arizona.” Agricultural and Forest Meteorology 105, no. 13: 227–240. 10.1016/S0168-1923(00)00193-3. Stella, J. C. , Battles J. J., Orr B. K., and McBride J. R.. 2006. “Synchrony of Seed Dispersal, Hydrology and Local Climate in a Semi‐Arid River Reach in California.” Ecosystems 9, no. 7: 1200–1214. 10.1007/s10021-005-0138-y. Stella, J. C. , and Bendix J.. 2019. “Chapter 5—Multiple Stressors in Riparian Ecosystems.” In Multiple Stressors in River Ecosystems, edited by Sabater S., Elosegi A., and Ludwig R., 81–110. Elsevier. 10.1016/B978-0-12-811713-2.00005-4. Stella, J. C. , Rodríguez‐González P. M., Dufour S., and Bendix J.. 2013. “Riparian Vegetation Research in Mediterranean‐Climate Regions: Common Patterns, Ecological Processes, and Considerations for Management.” Hydrobiologia 719: 291–315. 10.1007/s10750-012-1304-9. Stover, J. E. , Keller E. A., Dudley T. L., and Langendoen E. J.. 2018. “Fluvial Geomorphology, Root Distribution, and Tensile Strength of the Invasive Giant Reed, Arundo donax , and Its Role on Stream Bank Stability in the Santa Clara River, Southern California.” Geosciences 8, no. 8: 304. 10.3390/geosciences8080304. Stromberg, J. C. 2001. “Restoration of Riparian Vegetation in the South‐Western United States: Importance of Flow Regimes and Fluvial Dynamism.” Journal of Arid Environments 49, no. 1: 17–34. 10.1006/jare.2001.0833. Stromberg, J. C. 2013. “Root Patterns and Hydrogeomorphic Niches of Riparian Plants in the American Southwest.” Journal of Arid Environments 94: 1–9. 10.1016/j.jaridenv.2013.02.004. Stromberg, J. C. , Tiller R., and Richter B.. 1996. “Effects of Groundwater Decline on Riparian Vegetation of Semiarid Regions: The San Pedro, Arizona.” Ecological Applications 6, no. 1: 113–131. 10.2307/2269558. Swain, D. L. , Prein A. F., Abatzoglou J. T., et al. 2025. “Hydroclimate Volatility on a Warming Earth.” Nature Reviews Earth and Environment 6, no. 1: 35–50. 10.1038/s43017-024-00624-z. Torrence, C. , and Compo G. P.. 1998. “A Practical Guide to Wavelet Analysis.” Bulletin of the American Meteorological Society 79, no. 1: 61–78. 10.1175/1520-0477(1998)079&lt;0061:APGTWA&gt;2.0.CO;2. Valladares, F. , Gianoli E., and Gómez J. M.. 2007. “Ecological Limits to Plant Phenotypic Plasticity.” New Phytologist 176, no. 4: 749–763. 10.1111/j.1469-8137.2007.02275.x. Vázquez, D. P. , Gianoli E., Morris W. F., and Bozinovic F.. 2017. “Ecological and Evolutionary Impacts of Changing Climatic Variability.” Biological Reviews 92, no. 1: 22–42. 10.1111/brv.12216. Verhoef, W. 1996. “Application of Harmonic Analysis of NDVI Time Series (HANTS).” In Fourier Analysis of Temporal NDVI in the Southern African and American Continents, Report 108, edited by Azzali S. and Menenti M., 19–24. DLO Winand Staring Centre. Wada, Y. , Wisser D., and Bierkens M. F.. 2014. “Global Modeling of Withdrawal, Allocation and Consumptive Use of Surface Water and Groundwater Resources.” Earth System Dynamics 5: 15–40. 10.5194/esd-5-15-2014. Wang, H. , Rogers J. C., and Munroe D. K.. 2015. “Commonly Used Drought Indices as Indicators of Soil Moisture in China.” Journal of Hydrometeorology 16, no. 3: 1397–1408. 10.1175/JHM-D-14-0076.1. Wang, Y. , Chen X., Gao M., and Dong J.. 2022. “The Use of Random Forest to Identify Climate and Human Interference on Vegetation Coverage Changes in Southwest China.” Ecological Indicators 144: 109463. 10.1016/j.ecolind.2022.109463. Warter, M. M. , Singer M. B., Cuthbert M. O., et al. 2021. “Drought Onset and Propagation Into Soil Moisture and Grassland Vegetation Responses During the 2012–2019 Major Drought in Southern California.” Hydrology and Earth System Sciences 25, no. 6: 3713–3729. 10.5194/hess-25-3713-2021. Warter, M. M. , Singer M. B., Cuthbert M. O., et al. 2023. “Modeling Seasonal Vegetation Phenology From Hydroclimatic Drivers for Contrasting Plant Functional Groups Within Drylands of the Southwestern USA.” Environmental Research: Ecology 2, no. 2: 025001. 10.1088/2752-664x/acb9a0. Western Regional Climate Center . 2024a. “Pinnacles National Monument, California (046926) Period of Record Monthly Climate Summary 01/01/1937 to 05/31/2016.” https://wrcc.dri.edu/cgi‐bin/cliMAIN.pl?ca6926 . Western Regional Climate Center . 2024b. “Pinnacles California Station Monthly Time Series 01/01/2016 to 12/31/2024.” https://wrcc.dri.edu/cgi‐bin/rawMAIN.pl?caCPNN . White, W. N. 1932. A Method of Estimating Ground‐Water Supplies Based on Discharge by Plants and Evaporation From Soil: Results of Investigations in Escalante Valley, Utah. U.S. Geological Survey Water Supply Paper 659‐A. 10.3133/wsp659a. Williams, C. A. , and Cooper D. J.. 2005. “Mechanisms of Riparian Cottonwood Decline Along Regulated Rivers.” Ecosystems 8, no. 4: 382–395. 10.1007/s10021-003-0072-9. Williams, J. , Stella J. C., Singer M. B., et al. 2024. “Seasonal and Species‐Level Water‐Use Strategies and Groundwater Dependence in Dryland Riparian Woodlands During Extreme Drought.” Water Resources Research 60, no. 4: e2023WR035928. 10.1029/2023wr035928. Williams, J. , Stella J. C., Voelker S. L., et al. 2022. “Local Groundwater Decline Exacerbates Response of Dryland Riparian Woodlands to Climatic Drought.” Global Change Biology 28, no. 22: 6771–6788. 10.1111/gcb.16376. Wright, M. N. , and Ziegler A.. 2017. “Ranger: A Fast Implementation of Random Forests for High Dimensional Data in C++ and R.” Journal of Statistical Software 77, no. 1: 1–17. 10.18637/jss.v077.i01. Wu, C. , Peng J., Ciais P., et al. 2022. “Increased Drought Effects on the Phenology of Autumn Leaf Senescence.” Nature Climate Change 12, no. 10: 943–949. 10.1038/s41558-022-01464-9. Yang, G. , Shen H., Zhang L., He Z., and Li X.. 2015. “A Moving Weighted Harmonic Analysis Method for Reconstructing High‐Quality SPOT VEGETATION NDVI Time‐Series Data.” IEEE Transactions on Geoscience and Remote Sensing 53, no. 11: 6008–6021. 10.1109/tgrs.2015.2431315. Yu, H. L. , and Lin Y. C.. 2015. “Analysis of Space–Time Non‐Stationary Patterns of Rainfall–Groundwater Interactions by Integrating Empirical Orthogonal Function and Cross Wavelet Transform Methods.” Journal of Hydrology 525: 585–597. 10.1016/j.jhydrol.2015.03.057. Zeileis, A. , and Hothorn T.. 2002. “Diagnostic Checking in Regression Relationships.” R News 2, no. 3: 7–10. Zipper, S. C. , Hammond J. C., Shanafield M., et al. 2021. “Pervasive Changes in Stream Intermittency Across the United States.” Environmental Research Letters 16, no. 8: 084033. 10.1088/1748-9326/ac14ec. Zomer, R. J. , Xu J., and Trabucco A.. 2022. “Version 3 of the Global Aridity Index and Potential Evapotranspiration Database.” Scientific Data 9, no. 1: 409. 10.1038/s41597-022-01493-1. Zunzunegui, M. , Díaz Barradas M. C., Ain‐Lhout F., Alvarez‐Cansino L., Esquivias M. P., and García Novo F.. 2011. “Seasonal Physiological Plasticity and Recovery Capacity After Summer Stress in Mediterranean Scrub Communities.” Plant Ecology 212: 127–142. 10.1007/s11258-010-9809-7. Associated Data Supplementary Materials Figure S1: Timing and magnitude of groundwater use by trees. (a) Wavelet diagrams illustrating the power of each frequency in depth to water table (DTW) data from well SC‐2 (intermittent). Warmer colors at the daily scale (period = ~1) indicate when there is a strong evapotranspiration signal. (b) Depth to water table (m). (c) Estimates of evapotranspiration from groundwater (ET gw ) (mm/day) from the White method are shown for the dry (yellow triangles) and wet (blue circles) seasons. Growing seasons are highlighted in gray. Figure S2: Riparian tree species composition at the four monitoring sites. The bar charts show the total canopy area (m 2 ) for each tree species within a 100‐m radius of the monitoring wells at (a) the perennial site (SC‐5) and (b–d) the intermittent sites (CHA‐4, SC‐2, and SC‐4). Note the high abundance of deciduous species (valley oak, cottonwood) at the perennial site, compared to the higher proportion of evergreen species (coast live oak) at the intermittent sites. Figure S3: Variable importance rankings for random forest models predicting NDVI using alternative precipitation covariates, including 1‐, 2‐, and 3‐month precipitation lags and 3‐ and 6‐month accumulated precipitation sums. Data Availability Statement The data that support the findings of this study are openly available in the Dryad Digital Repository at https://doi.org/10.5061/dryad.cjsxksnj7 .