pmc Stat Med Stat Med 379 blackwellopen SIM Statistics in Medicine 0277-6715 1097-0258 pmc-is-collection-domain yes pmc-collection-title Wiley Open Access Collection PMC12871009 PMC12871009.1 12871009 12871009 41636560 10.1002/sim.70379 SIM70379 1 Research Article Research Article Missing Value Imputation With Adversarial Random Forests— MissARF Golchian Pegah 1 2 Kapar Jan https://orcid.org/0009-0000-6408-2840 1 2 Watson David S. 3 Wright Marvin N. 1 2 4 wright@leibniz-bips.de 1 Leibniz Institute for Prevention Research and Epidemiology—BIPS Bremen Germany 2 Faculty of Mathematics and Computer Science University of Bremen Bremen Germany 3 Department of Informatics King's College London London UK 4 Department of Public Health University of Copenhagen København Denmark * Correspondence: Marvin N. Wright ( wright@leibniz-bips.de ) 04 2 2026 2 2026 45 3-5 506821 10.1002/sim.v45.3-5 e70379 30 10 2025 05 12 2024 19 12 2025 04 02 2026 05 02 2026 05 02 2026 © 2026 The Author(s). Statistics in Medicine published by John Wiley &amp; Sons Ltd. https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/ This is an open access article under the terms of the http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/ License, which permits use, distribution and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited. ABSTRACT Handling missing values is a common challenge in biostatistical analyses, typically addressed by imputation methods. We propose a novel, fast, and easy‐to‐use imputation method called missing value imputation with adversarial random forests (MissARF) , based on generative machine learning, that provides both single and multiple imputation. MissARF employs adversarial random forest (ARF) for density estimation and data synthesis. To impute a missing value of an observation, we condition on the non‐missing values and sample from the estimated conditional distribution generated by ARF. Our experiments demonstrate that MissARF performs comparably to state‐of‐the‐art single and multiple imputation methods in terms of imputation quality and fast runtime with no additional costs for multiple imputation. adversarial learning generative modeling missing data multiple imputation single imputation tree‐based machine learning methods Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft 10.13039/501100001659 437611051 459360854 U Bremen Research Alliance/AI Center for Health Care pmc-status-qastatus 0 pmc-status-live yes pmc-status-embargo no pmc-status-released yes pmc-prop-open-access yes pmc-prop-olf no pmc-prop-manuscript no pmc-prop-legally-suppressed no pmc-prop-has-pdf yes pmc-prop-has-supplement yes pmc-prop-pdf-only no pmc-prop-suppress-copyright no pmc-prop-is-real-version no pmc-prop-is-scanned-article no pmc-prop-preprint no pmc-prop-in-epmc yes pmc-license-ref CC BY source-schema-version-number 2.0 cover-date February 2026 details-of-publishers-convertor Converter:WILEY_ML3GV2_TO_JATSPMC version:6.6.8 mode:remove_FC converted:04.02.2026 P. Golchian , J. Kapar , D. S. Watson , and M. N. Wright , “ Missing Value Imputation With Adversarial Random Forests— MissARF ,” Statistics in Medicine 45 , no. 3‐5 ( 2026 ): e70379 , 10.1002/sim.70379 . 1 Introduction Working with real data can be challenging because we often have to face the problem of missing values. If we want to analyze data, for example, regarding inference or prediction tasks, it is crucial to properly address this issue. Missing values can arise from various causes, such as human error, equipment failure, or participants withdrawing from studies. Behind the missing values in a dataset are different missing data patterns that Rubin [ 1 ] defines as: missing completely at random (MCAR), missing at random (MAR) and missing not at random (MNAR). It is assumed that each data point has a probability of being missing. While with MCAR this probability is the same for all data points, with MAR it depends on observed data. MNAR is the most challenging pattern, since its missingness can depend on observed but also unobserved data, including the missing variable itself. Improper handling of these missingness types can introduce bias, weaken the statistical power as well as prediction performance of machine learning models [ 2 , 3 ]. While some biostatistical methods can handle missing values internally [ 4 , 5 , 6 , 7 , 8 ], most require dealing with them beforehand. Many methods to approach missing data are available, yet there is no single best‐suited method overall [ 9 , 10 , 11 , 12 ]. The easiest way to handle missing values is complete‐case analysis (listwise deletion) , where all observations containing missing values are omitted. In the case of a few missings and MCAR, complete‐case analysis can give unbiased estimates of, for example, means and regression coefficients, but standard errors are generally overestimated [ 2 ]. In cases other than MCAR it can lead to biased estimates [ 2 , 13 ]. Furthermore, with growing missingness and other factors [ 14 ], more information gets lost, up to the point where not a single non‐missing observation remains. Methods that fill missing values are called imputation methods . The literature distinguishes between single imputation , which outputs a single complete dataset, and multiple imputation , which outputs multiple ones. A simple example would be to impute by sampling a random value from the marginal empirical distributions of each variable once for a single imputation and multiple times for multiple imputation ( random imputation ). While with single imputation the dataset is just analyzed once, multiple imputation introduces imputation uncertainty by analyzing each of the imputed datasets and pooling the results into a final point estimate with standard error estimated by “Rubin's rules” [ 13 , 15 ] and therefore reduces bias. Depending on the task and data structure, different imputation methods are preferred. For prediction tasks, single imputation is often favored for its simplicity and computational efficiency whereas for statistical inference, multiple imputation is typically recommended [ 2 , 15 ]. Other simple examples of single imputation methods are mean or median imputation , where each missing value is filled with the mean or median of the observed values of that variable. These can lead to biased estimates as well, except for the mean, which is unbiased for MCAR in some cases [ 2 ]. Furthermore, the variance can be underestimated and the relations between the variables distorted [ 2 ]. In contrast to complete‐case analysis, single imputations tend to underestimate standard errors [ 2 ]. More sophisticated machine learning methods, such as MissForest [ 16 ]—an iterative method based on the random forest (RF) algorithm [ 17 ] that treats the missing data problem as a prediction problem—are becoming increasingly popular. Machine learning methods have the benefit of tackling complex interactions and nonlinearities of variables and yield superior and fast results in terms of prediction performance [ 7 ]. However, these approaches still do not account for imputation uncertainty, resulting in smaller p values, narrower confidence intervals, and stronger relationships between variables than in the real dataset [ 2 ]. Multiple imputation [ 13 , 18 ] accounts for imputation uncertainty and can, under suitable conditions, lead to unbiased estimates with appropriately estimated standard errors and valid statistical inference [ 2 ]. A popular implementation of multiple imputation is given by multivariate imputation by chained equations (MICE) [ 19 ]. The R package mice [ 20 ] offers different ways to create multiple datasets, for example, with predictive mean matching (PMM) —a nearest neighbor approach, which is the current default for numerical data—or with tree‐based methods such as RFs. Depending on the data structure, different built‐in univariate imputation methods are recommended [ 2 ]. However, with real data, the data distribution is typically unknown and for a user it is not always clear which option to choose. Some single imputation methods can be extended to multiple imputation, as long as there is sufficient variability across the different datasets. For example, as mentioned above, random imputation can simply be repeated several times and an approach has been made to extend MissForest to multiple imputation by adding PMM to the out‐of‐bag (OOB) predictions [ 21 ]. Generating synthetic data and imputing missing data address a similar question—finding plausible values for unobserved data. In this paper, we establish this link and consider imputation with generative models. Alongside the current hype about generative machine learning for text generation (e.g., ChatGPT [ 22 ]) and image creation (e.g., DALL‐E [ 23 ]), a few approaches have been proposed to use generative models for imputation [ 24 , 25 , 26 , 27 , 28 ]. However, those methods are almost exclusively based on deep learning approaches, making them data‐hungry, computationally intensive and difficult to train for non‐experts. Further, deep learning often struggles with tabular data [ 29 , 30 ] and most of the aforementioned deep learning approaches are not available in R . We argue that an imputation method for everyday biostatistical practice should perform well on tabular data, be computationally fast, easy to use without much hyperparameter tuning and be available in R . With these goals in mind, we present a novel imputation method based on the adversarial random forest (ARF) [ 31 ] algorithm, a recently proposed tree‐based generative model that has been shown to perform well in data synthesis on tabular data [ 31 , 32 ]. Our method missing value imputation with adversarial random forests (MissARF) offers both single and multiple imputation. We introduce MissARF in Section 2 , which outlines how ARFs can be used for single and multiple imputation. In Section 3 , we compare MissARF with other imputation methods such as MICE and MissForest for single and multiple imputation on simulated data and in Section 4 on a real data example. Lastly, in Section 5 we summarize and discuss our results and provide an outlook. 2 Methods 2.1 Adversarial Random Forests Adversarial random forests (ARFs) [ 31 ] are a tree‐based machine learning algorithm for generative modeling. They implement an iterative variant of unsupervised RFs [ 33 ] that gradually learns the structural properties of the data, building a basis for density estimation and generative modeling. ARFs bear some resemblance to generative adversarial networks (GANs) [ 34 ]. The difference is that in ARF the discriminator is a RF and the generator leverages the parameters of the discriminator instead of being a separate model. Intuitively, ARFs work as follows: (1) Train a RF to distinguish between naïve synthetic data (created by sampling from the product of the marginals) and real data. (2) Sample again from the product of marginals inside the leaves of this RF and train another RF to distinguish between this new, less naïve synthetic data and the original data. (3) Repeat step (2) until the synthetic data cannot be distinguished from the original data. (4) Apply a univariate density estimation procedure to each feature in each leaf. (5) For data synthesis, draw a leaf according to leaf weights (see below) and sample from the local density estimated in step (4). In more detail, let X real ∈ ℝ n × p be a dataset with n ∈ ℕ instances of a set of p ∈ ℕ features, where each row represents a sample from the feature space X ⊆ ℝ p . To train an ARF, we first create a naïve synthetic dataset X synth ( 0 ) ∈ ℝ n × p by drawing from the original values with replacement separately within each column, effectively treating all features as independent. The real data points are labeled with 1 and the synthetic data points with 0. In the first discriminator step, a RF is trained on the binary classification setting with X ( 0 ) = X real , X synth ( 0 ) and Y = 1 n , 0 n , that is, the RF is trained to distinguish the naïve synthetic data from the real data. In the next generating step, we exploit the splits of the forest to create a more realistic synthetic dataset X synth ( 1 ) . For this, we again sample the original values with replacement separately within each column—but this time we do so within each leaf of the RF (keeping the same size) resulting in a dataset that more closely resembles the original. Now, at the next discriminator step, we train a new RF on X ( 1 ) = X real , X synth ( 1 ) . We continue the generating and discriminating steps until the RF cannot distinguish between real and synthetic data. We measure this convergence with the out‐of‐bag (OOB) accuracy [ 17 ] and stop if the OOB accuracy is less than 0.5 + δ with a small δ ≥ 0 . Our final model is the last RF before the OOB accuracy falls below this threshold. Let T be the number of trees in the final forest of ARF. Let L be the number of leaves over all T trees in the RF and L t the number of leaves in a tree t ∈ [ T ] . For each tree, each leaf l ∈ L t represents a unique hyperrectangular subspace X l ⊂ X where all subspaces together span the whole data manifold X = ∪ l X l . Leaves are characterized by a conjunction of tree splits that define the complete path starting from the root. Let n t be the number of “real” training samples for tree t and n tl the number of those real samples that fall into leaf l . Then the probability that an observation x falls within X l in tree t —the leaf's coverage —can be empirically estimated by n tl / n t . We now assign equal weights to all trees in the RF and define the leaf weights over the whole RF as ω l = n tl Tn t . In case of convergence, we can assume that all features are mutually independent within the leaves. For all x ∈ X , the local independence criterion can be formulated as (1) p ^ l ( x ) = ∏ j = 1 p p ^ lj x j , where p l denotes the multivariate density within a leaf and p lj the univariate density for a feature within a leaf. The proof can be found in Watson et al. [ 31 ]. Intuitively, the ARF procedure can only learn dependency structures of the data by “splitting out” the dependencies in the trees and as soon as it is unable to learn any further dependencies, we can assume the data to be independent (within the leaves). The local independence criterion simplifies the task of multivariate density estimation, which can now be achieved by learning p separate univariate density estimation functions within each leaf for each feature based on the original values. Watson et al. [ 31 ] implemented a maximum likelihood‐based truncated Gaussian approach for continuous variables and multinomial distributions for categorical ones. The estimated density of ARF at a given point x ∈ X is defined as: (2) p ^ ARF ( x ) = ∑ l = 1 L ω l p ^ l ( x ) = ∑ l = 1 L ω l ∏ j = 1 p p ^ lj x j . It takes the weighted average of the densities of all the leaves into which x falls, that is, where the split criteria are met. Since ARF uses intra‐leaf distributions truncated to the leaf bounds in practice, leaves where x ∈ X l naturally receive zero weights ω l = 0 . Watson et al. [ 31 ] prove under mild conditions that p ^ ARF converges to the real data distribution of X real for infinite data. Generating new synthetic data points using ARF works as follows: We first sample leaves with probabilities ω l . Then we create synthetic data points by sampling independently from the estimated univariate densities within the leaves for every variable. We can also perform conditional density estimation and sampling with ARF under a set of conditions by filtering out the leaves that match the conditions and updating the leaf weights ω l . This procedure was first used to generate counterfactual explanations with ARFs [ 35 ]. Conditional density estimation and sampling are necessary for our missing value imputation method and will be described in detail below. 2.2 MissARF : Missing Value Imputation With Adversarial Random Forests Missing value imputation with adversarial random forests (MissARF) is an imputation method based on generative modeling that offers single and multiple imputation. The general idea is to condition on non‐missing values and impute missing values by sampling from the conditional distribution, estimated by an ARF. To estimate the conditional distribution, we filter the leaves where the condition on non‐missing values matches the splits in the trees and apply the local density estimation on those leaves for each feature on the real observations. Next, we adjust the leaf weights with the filtered leaves. Finally, we sample a leaf according to the new leaf weights and impute by sampling a value from the estimated conditional distribution. Let x be a data point that contains missing values at the index positions C ‾ = j | x j = NA , where NA symbolizes a missing value. Further, let X C denote the random variable of the non‐missing values x C with C = j | x j ≠ NA . Then for all x C ‾ ∈ X C ‾ , the conditional density given x C can be estimated exploiting Bayes' theorem and the local independence assumption within the leaves as (3) p ^ ARF x C ‾ | X C = x C = p ^ ARF x C ‾ , x C p ^ ARF x C = p ^ ARF ( x ) p ^ ARF x C = ∑ l = 1 L ω l p ^ l x C p ^ l x C ‾ p ^ ARF x C = ∑ l = 1 L ω l p ^ l x C p ^ ARF x C ∏ j ∈ C ‾ p ^ lj x j = ∑ l = 1 L ω ˜ l ∏ j ∈ C ‾ p ^ lj x j with adjusted leaf weights ω ˜ l ≔ ω ˜ l x C ≔ ω l p ^ l x C p ^ ARF x C . Intuitively, the weights are rescaled by the intra‐leaf densities p ^ l x C and normalized by the marginal global density p ^ ARF x C to ensure that leaves where the condition is more likely fulfilled receive higher weights and that the weights sum to 1. As above, because ARF uses intra‐leaf distributions truncated to the leaf bounds in practice, leaves with ranges not satisfying the condition naturally receive zero weights ω ˜ l = 0 . We can get an imputed data point x ˙ analogous to the unconditional case by first sampling a leaf that matches the condition based on the adjusted leaf weights ω ˜ l and then sampling a value from the distribution estimated in that leaf for the missing feature. 1 To impute a whole dataset with MissARF, we consider all the rows that contain missing values and condition on the non‐missing values for each of them. For single imputation, we can directly use the imputed data point x ˙ , drawn from the conditional distribution (Equation 3 ), for each row and by that create a complete dataset. However, since we estimated the full conditional density, we can also calculate summary statistics such as the mean, median or mode in a leaf, to achieve a more stable imputation result. Alternatively, for continuous features, we could impute the expected value of the conditional distribution estimated by ARF, that is, the expected value over all leaves that match the condition, a method we adopt by default in our experiments. Let μ lj be the mean of the real and non‐missing feature values of x j within a leaf l conditioned on the non‐missing values x C . With the adjusted leaf weights ω ˜ l , we can then impute the value x ˙ j by: (4) x ˙ j = E X j | X C = x C = ∑ l = 1 L ω ˜ l μ lj . To address categorical features, we impute by the most frequent category in the selected leaves, weighted by ω ˜ l . For multiple imputation, we can sample several times from the conditional distribution (Equation 3 ) to get a range of imputed datasets. Note that we do not sample several times from the same distribution estimated in a single leaf, but sample a new leaf based on the (adjusted) leaf weights for each new imputation. To use MissARF, the RFs in the ARF procedure have to be trained on the original dataset, containing missing values. However, by construction, RFs cannot handle missing values without further modifications. Several such modifications have been proposed [ 7 , 8 ], but a systematic comparison of these methods is lacking. Here, we implemented a slightly modified version of the missingness incorporated in attributes [ 36 , 37 ] approach in ranger [ 38 ], 2 which learns an optimal child node assignment of missing values during the calculation of the node split criterion. For categorical features, this is done by simply treating the missing values as a separate category. For numerical features, the following two splits are compared based on the split criterion: Split A: x j ≤ s or x j = NA versus x j &gt; s Split B: x j ≤ s versus x j &gt; s or x j = NA , where s is the split value selected for feature x j . The finally selected split point is the one that maximizes the split criterion, that is, minimizes the loss function. 2.2.1 Example and Intuitive Explanation To illustrate MissARF, we use a simple two‐dimensional dataset with two features with points in clusters around ( − 1 , 1 ) and ( 1 , − 1 ) . In Figure 1a , we show such an example with only four observations labeled as y = 1 (blue) and the resulting synthetic dataset labeled as y = 0 (orange), which are plotted in Figure 1b . Assume that we have a data point x = ( − 1 , NA ) that we would like to impute. For that, we filter the leaves, where the condition on non‐missing values matches the splits in the trees. In this exemplary tree of the RF (Figure 1c ), we would end up in the two left leaves since x 1 &lt; 0 and x 2 is undefined. In the next step, we sample one of the filtered leaves weighted by the share of real data points (leaf weights ω ˜ l ) and then impute by sampling from the estimated distribution for that feature in this leaf for the missing feature. In this example, we sample the left leaf and then sample marginally from x 2 and could then end up with, for example, x ˙ 2 = 1 . FIGURE 1 Single imputation example with MissARF of the point x = ( − 1 , NA ) on one exemplary tree of a converged ARF of a two‐dimensional dataset consisting of clusters around ( − 1 , 1 ) and ( 1 , − 1 ) . Real data points are labeled with y = 1 (blue) and synthetic data points are labeled with y = 0 (orange). If the tree predicts real observations, it is colored in blue and orange otherwise. (a) Shows the reduced example dataset in a tabular form. (b) The partition plot of the exemplary tree of ARF in (c), where the imputation example is visualized. 2.2.2 Application in R The implementation of MissARF is integrated into the arf [ 39 ] package 3 itself. Assume the R object data is a dataset with missing values. It can be imputed with MissARF as follows: library(arf) # Single imputation data_single_imp &lt;‐ arf::impute(data) # Multiple imputation data_multiple_imp &lt;‐ arf::impute(data, m = 20) 3 Simulation Studies 3.1 Setup We compare our novel imputation method MissARF with state‐of‐the‐art single and multiple imputation methods in terms of imputation quality and runtime. In the following, we refer to setting I for single imputation, and to setting II for multiple imputation. We replicate each experiment 1000 times in both settings. 3.1.1 Simulated Data To cover different settings, we generate different correlated multivariate data for X ∈ ℝ n × p using a Gaussian copula‐based approach [ 40 ], where each dataset is generated from one of the following univariate distributions: N ( 0 , 1 ) , Binom ( 0.5 ) , Pois ( 2 ) , Gamma ( 2,0.5 ) , and U ( − 1 , 1 ) . The correlation structure is defined by a Toeplitz matrix Corr ( X ) ij = 0.5 ∣ j − i ∣ , where neighboring features are correlated the most. To simulate data, we utilize the R package simstudy [ 41 ]. We choose different numbers of features p ∈ { 4,10,20 } and different sample sizes n ∈ { 500,1000,10 000 } . Further, we simulate a linear and squared effect on a binary outcome Y ∈ ℝ n , with an effect size of the features chosen as β = ( − 0.5 , … ,0.5 ) ∈ ℝ p with an equidistant step size. More precisely, let x i denote a row of X with an outcome y i . For each n simulated observations x i , we sample y i from a binomial distribution y i ∼ Binom π i with π i = σ x i β or π i = σ x i 2 β where σ is the pointwise standard logistic function σ ( x ) = 1 1 + e − x . To measure downstream prediction performance (see below), we simulate an additional test dataset of the same size n . 3.1.2 Missing Data For all datasets, we simulate the missing data patterns MCAR, MAR and MNAR for missingness proportions of 0.1, 0.2 and 0.4. To simulate missing values in a selected feature by MAR or MNAR, the feature values are divided into two groups defined by a cut‐off value (here, the median). For MAR, the cut‐off value is calculated on another fully observed variable and for MNAR on the variable itself. One of the two groups, either above or below the median, is then chosen at random and missing values are introduced within this group. For our implementation, we use the R package missMethods [ 42 ]. To maintain consistency across all cases and comply with the MAR definition, where missingness depends on an observed variable, we introduce missing values in only half of the features. For the prediction task, missingness is introduced separately in both the training and test data. 3.1.3 Metrics In setting I (single imputation), we consider the normalized root mean squared error (NRMSE) as a measure of data dissimilarity and the Brier score [ 43 ] as a measure of downstream prediction performance. The NRMSE evaluates the point‐wise similarity of an imputed X ˙ and the original dataset X . To achieve comparability for features measured on different scales, we first standardize the features and then calculate the RMSE over all points. To get a consistent standardization over all imputed datasets, we always choose the same μ X and σ X from the original dataset X yielding a standardized imputed dataset as X ˙ ˜ = X ˙ − μ X σ X . We take the intuitive extension of the one‐dimensional NRMSE, which is a Euclidean distance, to a high‐dimensional NRMSE by the Frobenius norm. Let x ˙ ˜ ij ∈ X ˙ ˜ ⊆ ℝ n × p be an entry in the normalized imputed dataset and x ˜ ij ∈ X ˜ ⊆ ℝ n × p in the normalized ground truth dataset, then the NRMSE can be calculated as (5) NRMSE ( X ˙ , X ) = 1 n ⋅ p ∑ j = 1 p ∑ i = 1 n x ˙ ˜ ij − x ˜ ij 2 . The Brier score assesses calibration as well as discrimination of predictions. First, we fit a generalized linear model to the imputed training data. We then use this model to predict the probability for Y = 1 with the imputed test data. For each of the n observations in the test data, we then compare the true y value with the predicted probability π ^ using the Brier score: (6) Brier Score ( π ^ , y ) = 1 n ∑ i = 1 n π ^ i − y i 2 . In setting II (multiple imputation), we are interested in whether we can derive reliable statistical inferences with our imputed datasets. Here, the parameters of interest are the regression coefficients β of a logistic regression. For simulated data, these values are given by the data‐generating process (see above) itself. With “Rubin's rules” we obtain a parameter estimate β ^ as the mean of the m estimates of the imputed datasets and a standard error for this estimate. From this, we can calculate ( 1 − α ) ‐confidence intervals for each regression coefficient of a feature β j , such that for the random variables A j and B j , with A j &lt; B j , the probability P A j &lt; β j &lt; B j = 1 − α holds. With the realizations A j = a j and B j = b j we can define the confidence interval as CI j = a j , b j . We assess the quality of statistical inference by examining the coverage rate, average width of the confidence intervals and the root mean squared error (RMSE) of the regression coefficients. The coverage rate indicates how often, over K replications, confidence intervals encompass the actual value of the parameter of a feature j : (7) P ^ Cov A j &lt; β j &lt; B j = 1 K ∑ k = 1 K 1 a j ( k ) &lt; β j &lt; b j ( k ) , with the indicator function 1 ( ⋅ ) that returns 1 if the β j is in the estimated confidence interval and 0 otherwise. The coverage should be close to the nominal rate, which in our experiments is 95%. Empirical coverage below the nominal rate is regarded as too optimistic or liberal; coverage above the target rate as too conservative. If the coverage rate is valid, that is, close to the nominal rate, we prefer an average width of confidence intervals as small as possible, which demonstrates statistical efficiency. We get the width by calculating the mean difference between the upper and lower bound of CI over the replications, that is, AW A j , B j = 1 K ∑ k = 1 K b j ( k ) − a j ( k ) . Finally, we calculate the root mean squared error (RMSE) for a feature j between the true regression coefficients β j and the ones resulting from the imputed datasets β ^ j ( 1 ) , … , β ^ j ( K ) to assess how accurate and precise the coefficients can be estimated, that is, (8) RMSE β ^ j ( 1 ) , … , β ^ j ( K ) ; β j = 1 K ∑ k = 1 K β ^ j ( k ) − β j 2 . 3.1.4 Compared Imputation Methods For setting I, we choose random imputation and median imputation as baseline methods. We do not consider complete‐case analysis because it does not produce an imputed dataset and would thus only be relevant for performance evaluation and, more importantly, often results in too few observations under high missingness rates. Further, we consider MICE 4 with internal imputation methods predictive mean matching (PMM) and RFs. In our experiments, we refer to these as MICE PMM and MICE RF , respectively. We use the mice R package [ 20 ]. Lastly, we consider MissForest [ 16 ], a popular single imputation method based on RFs. For MissForest, we choose the R package missRanger [ 21 ], which is a faster implementation of the original missForest package. The missRanger package provides an additional option to combine MissForest with PMM and by that creates more diverse datasets for multiple imputation. We consider both the original version ( MissForest ) and the version including PMM ( MissForest PMM ). For MissARF, we choose 100 trees and 10 as the minimum node size. 5 For setting II, we chose the same methods as in the previous settings except for median imputation, which, by construction, cannot generate multiple datasets. We create 20 datasets for multiple imputation for simplicity and due to computational restrictions. As MissForest (without PMM), we consider the naïve approach of running MissForest several times, without an additional PMM step. 3.2 Results In the following, we present the results for single and multiple imputation methods on simulated data. In the first setting, we compare different single imputation methods and measure the performance with NRMSE and the Brier Score. In the second setting, we compare different multiple imputation methods and evaluate them by the coverage rate, average width of confidence intervals, and the RMSE of regression coefficients. To give a better overview of the results, we describe common patterns and show representative example plots in Figures 2 and 3 . FIGURE 2 Common patterns in simulation results of setting I over different missingness patterns and dimensionality ( p ) for missingness rates (mis.) 0.4 . Common pattern for the NRMSE are exemplified for the normal distribution with a linear effect and (a) n = 1000 and (b) n = 500 and the binary distribution with a squared effect for (c) n = 1000 and (d) n = 500 . The Brier score pattern is exemplified for (e) normal distribution with a linear effect and n = 1000 and (f) the binary distribution with a squared effect and n = 1000 . For single imputation, MissARF (blue) and MissForest (orange) perform best in NRMSE (a–d) and Brier score (e). The boxplots are plotted over the replicates. FIGURE 3 Common patterns in simulation results of setting II over different missingness patterns and rates (mis.) and dimensionality p = 10 . The coverage rate of the normal distribution is shown for a linear effect with (a) n = 1000 and (d) n = 10 000 and a squared effect for (e) n = 1000 and (f) n = 10 000 . The red vertical line shows the nominal coverage level of 0.95. Random imputation and MissForest (gray) often show poor coverage. MICE PMM (green) works best for linear effects, whereas MissARF (blue) struggles with high missingness (d), but has the smallest average CI width (b) and RMSE (c), where MICE PMM has the largest. MissARF works best for squared effects, where MICE PMM struggles. The boxplots are plotted over the features. 3.2.1 Results of Setting I: Single Imputation 3.2.1.1 NRMSE For all distributions except the binary distribution, we notice a similar pattern, which is shown on an example plot in Figure 2a , where the distribution is normal with a linear effect and n = 1000 . Figure 2a shows the results for missingness proportion 0.4 and for the different number of features p ∈ { 4,10,20 } . MissARF and MissForest perform the best depending on the number of features. While for p = 4 MissARF dominates, for p = 10 MissForest is slightly better or both perform equally well. For p = 20 , MissForest consistently attains the lowest error, with MissARF not far behind. In MCAR and MAR, median imputation performs next best after MissARF and MissForest, followed by MICE and MissForest PMM, which perform similarly well. For MNAR, median imputation is slightly worse than MICE and MissForest PMM. In all settings, random imputation performs the worst. This pattern is also seen across the missingness proportions, with the difference that median imputation is similar to MICE and MissForest PMM. Also for n = 500 (Figure 2b ) and n = 10 000 we notice a similar behavior, with a slight advantage for MICE PMM compared to MICE RF and MissForest PMM for n = 500 . For the other distributions (except for binary), we observe a similar pattern. All the results can be found in Figures S1–S8 and S11–S18 . In contrast, for the binary distribution for both linear and squared effect, MissARF dominates in all settings for n = 1000 and n = 10 000 (Figures S10 and S20 ). This is exemplarily shown in Figure 2c for a squared effect, n = 1000 and a fixed missingness proportion of 0.4 over the different p . Median imputation performs worse in this setting. For n = 500 (Figure 2d ) the difference between MissARF and MissForest is smaller, and as before MissARF is slightly better than MissForest for p = 4 and MissForest is better otherwise (Figures S9 and S19 ). 3.2.1.2 Brier Score Generally, the differences in the Brier score are less pronounced than for the NRMSE. As a general trend, MissForest and MissARF perform the best, while random and median imputation perform the worst. MICE and MissForest PMM perform similarly and rank second‐best. This pattern is exemplified in Figure 2e for the normal distribution with a linear effect and in Figure 2f for the binary distribution with a squared effect for n = 1000 and mis . = 0.4 over the different p . This pattern can be observed across all distributions and all parameters, with all results shown in Figures S21–S40 . 3.2.2 Results of Setting II : Multiple Imputation Unlike before, the results for the multiple imputation setting do not have a consistent pattern across settings. Nevertheless, we systematically grouped the results into three broader categories: (1) Similar performance across all methods, MissARF with smallest average width . (2) PMM methods struggle, MissARF performs well . (3) All methods perform poorly . While the behavior for the linear effect is quite similar (Category 1), we find more differences in the distributions for the squared effect (Categories 1–3). We first summarize the main results of Categories 1 and 2 and illustrate them in Figure 3 with exemplary plots based on the normal distribution for p = 10 . For Category 1, a common pattern for the coverage rate is illustrated in Figure 3a . Here, MissForest and random imputation show the poorest performance. This is what we expect from the baseline methods and from MissForest because it is a single imputation method (naïvely repeated several times). In contrast, the other methods all show good results on a similar level. However, MissARF in some cases shows difficulties at higher levels of missingness, where MICE PMM typically performs best (Figure 3d ). For the average CI width (Figure 3b ) and the RMSE (Figure 3c ) the methods perform similar, and differ more with growing missingness. Random imputation has the smallest width followed by MissARF, MICE RF and MissForest PMM. MICE PMM has a larger width in comparison with growing missingness proportions. Note that a smaller average width indicates better performance if coverage is close to 95%. Regarding the RMSE with growing missingness, random imputation and MissForest get worse and MICE PMM is slightly larger than the other multiple imputation methods. For Category 2, a common pattern for the coverage is visualized for the normal distribution with squared effect in Figure 3e,f . MissARF generally works best, while MICE PMM shows the poorest performance. Here, MICE RF and MissForest PMM perform better than MICE PMM but worse than MissARF. The average width remains similar across the settings (Figure S74 ). The RMSE of the coefficients (Figure S94 ) often mirrors the results of the coverage rate: The closer a method is to 95% in the coverage rate, the closer it is to 0 here, where small values indicate better performance. In the following, we provide a more detailed description of the results in subcategories, where all plots are provided in the Supporting Information . 3.2.2.1 Category 1: Similar Performance Across All Methods, MissARF With Smallest Average Width Gamma, normal, uniform, Poisson distribution with linear effect: For gamma, normal and uniform distribution with linear effect and n ∈ { 500 , 1000 } , the competing multiple imputation methods demonstrate similarly good coverage rates with a slight advantage for MICE PMM across the different missingness proportions and p . Random imputation and MissForest do not perform well with growing missingness. MICE PMM performs especially well when p = 4 with a missingness proportion of 0.4—where the other methods perform poorer—as well as for n = 500 in most distributions, and generally for the uniform distribution. Regarding average width, MissARF often has the smallest along with random imputation and MICE RF not far behind, while MICE PMM has the largest. At n = 10 000 and considering the Poisson distribution for all n , we notice a poor performance of MissARF at high missingness rates. But also the other multiple imputation methods perform poorer, where often MICE PMM still maintains good coverage. For MNAR and Poisson and gamma distribution, all methods perform poorly. Notably, MissForest PMM performs poorly under p = 4 (coverage: Figures S41–S48 ; average CI width: Figures S61–S68 ; RMSE: Figures S81–S88 ). Binary distribution with linear and squared effect: In most cases, all competing methods except MissForest generally perform well with MICE RF having an advantage for p = 4 and MICE PMM otherwise. MissARF is often poorer for high missingness rates. For p = 4 , the PMM methods exhibit very high coverage rates, likely due to the large average width of the confidence intervals, where MICE RF and MissARF (except for mis. = 0.4) perform good. Surprisingly, random imputation shows strong performance, but with a sample size of n = 10 000 it cannot maintain its performance across all settings, leading to a drastic decrease in some cases (coverage: Figures S49–S52 ; average CI width: Figures S69–S72 ; RMSE: Figures S89–S92 ). 3.2.2.2 Category 2: PMM Methods Struggle, MissARF Performs Well Normal distribution with squared effect: Among the methods, random imputation, MICE PMM, and MissForest PMM (in that order) exhibit poorer performance in the case of normal distribution with a squared effect. However, MissARF consistently performs well in this setting, in some cases along with MissForest and MICE RF. Notably, when most methods struggle (e.g., for n ∈ { 500 , 1000 } , p = 4 and mis. = 0.4 ), MissARF often maintains a meaningful coverage rate. For n = 10 000 this pattern is more visible even for lower missingness rates. However, at 0.4 all methods perform poorly (except MissARF in one case in Figure 3f ). The average width of the confidence intervals remains similar across methods, and the RMSE reflects the behavior of the coverage rate. Overall, we conclude that MissARF is the best‐performing method in this setting (coverage: Figures S53 and S54 ; average CI width: Figures S73 and S74 ; RMSE: Figures S93 and S94 ). Uniform distribution with squared effect: For n ∈ { 500 , 1000 } , all methods perform very well, where MissForest and MissARF have the best coverage rates. While MissForest tends to under‐cover, the others mostly tend towards overly conservative confidence intervals. For n = 10 000 , all methods have a similarly good coverage rate except for a missingness proportion of 0.4. Here, all methods tend towards under‐coverage while random imputation and MICE PMM perform worst (similar to normal squared n = 500 ). While for n = 10 000 the RMSE reflects the coverage rate results, the methods for n ∈ { 500 , 1000 } show similarly good RMSE values, with MissARF tending to be slightly larger, followed by MissForest at a greater distance. For all n , the average widths of the confidence intervals of the methods are very similar, except MissForest, which always has a smaller average width (coverage: Figures S55 and S56 ; average CI width: Figures S75 and S76 ; RMSE: Figures S95 and S96 ). 3.2.2.3 Category 3: All Methods Perform Poorly Poisson and gamma distribution with squared effect: For Poisson and gamma distribution with a squared effect, all methods have difficulties, that is, the coverage rate is far away from 95%, sometimes even close to zero. The higher n , p , or missingness proportion, the worse the performance gets. In very few cases, the MICE methods and especially MissForest still attain meaningful coverage rates. A notable exception is the setting with n ∈ { 500 , 1000 } , p = 4 and missingness proportion 0.1, where the coverage rate for all methods except random imputation is relatively close to 95%. For the cases, where the coverage is valid, the RMSE and the average width are very similar as well (coverage: Figures S57–S60 ; average CI width: Figures S77–S80 ; RMSE: Figures S97–S100 ). 3.2.3 Aggregated Simulation Results and Runtime Table 1 provides aggregated results over all simulation settings, including single imputation (data NRMSE, Brier score) and multiple imputation (coverage rate, confidence interval width, RMSE of coefficients). For single imputation, MissARF and MissForest perform best in both the data NRMSE and the Brier score, followed by MissForest PMM, the two MICE methods and median imputation. Random imputation performs worst. As observed before, median imputation performs relatively well in terms of NRMSE but not as well regarding the Brier score. TABLE 1 Aggregated results over all simulation settings for both single and multiple imputation. Single imputation Multiple imputation Method Data NRMSE, mean (SD) Brier score, mean (SD) Runtime (s), mean Coverage rate %, median (IQR) CI width, median (IQR) Coefficient RMSE, median (IQR) Runtime (s), mean Random Imp. 1.47 (0.11) 0.20 (0.05) &lt; 0.1 92.0 (46.8) 0.30 (0.47) 0.13 (0.11) &lt; 0.1 Median Imp. 1.21 (0.29) 0.19 (0.06) &lt; 0.1 — — — — MissForest 0.98 (0.19) 0.18 (0.06) 16.1 90.9 (13.1) 0.32 (0.47) 0.12 (0.14) 322.7 MissForest PMM 1.26 (0.14) 0.19 (0.06) 16.5 95.3 (6.0) 0.32 (0.48) 0.10 (0.11) 325.2 MICE PMM 1.23 (0.13) 0.19 (0.06) 0.2 94.9 (3.3) 0.34 (0.50) 0.11 (0.13) 3.9 MICE RF 1.27 (0.13) 0.19 (0.06) 4.0 95.2 (6.2) 0.31 (0.48) 0.10 (0.11) 78.5 MissARF 0.97 (0.16) 0.18 (0.06) 14.4 95.0 (9.2) 0.31 (0.48) 0.10 (0.10) 14.4 Note: Data NRMSE and Brier score refer to performance in the single imputation setting, coverage rate, confidence interval (CI) width and coefficient RMSE to performance in multiple imputation. For multiple imputation, MissForest PMM, MICE PMM, MICE RF and MissARF all are relatively close to the nominal level of 95%, ranging between 94.9% (MICE PMM) and 95.3% (MissForest PMM). MissForest (without PMM) and random imputation both have a poorer coverage rate. Random imputation, MissARF and MICE RF show the smallest average confidence interval width. However, since the coverage rate of random imputation is generally far away from the nominal level, the results for random imputation should be interpreted with care. The coefficient RMSE is the smallest with MissForest PMM, MICE RF and MissARF and largest for random imputation and MissForest. Table 1 shows single‐threaded runtime for simulated data with a normal distribution, linear effect and MAR, averaged over different numbers of features p ∈ { 4,10,20 } , n ∈ { 500,1000,10 000 } and missingness proportions mis . ∈ { 0.1,0.2,0.4 } . For single imputation, the simple baseline methods are the fastest, followed by the two MICE variants. MissForest, MissForest PMM and MissARF are slowest. For multiple imputation, MICE PMM is the fastest non‐baseline method, followed by MissARF and, with a larger difference, MICE RF. While the MICE and MissForest methods are considerably slower for multiple imputation (as expected, approximately 20× slower for 20 multiple imputation), this is not the case for MissARF, which is similarly fast for both single and multiple imputation. More detailed runtime results over different n , p and mis . are presented in the Supporting Information (Figures S102 and S103 ; Tables S1 and S2 ). Generally, runtime tends to increase with growing n and p , while the missingness proportion has little impact on the runtime. Using multithreading with 16 threads, MissARF is the fastest non‐baseline method, followed by MICE PMM, MissForest and MICE RF (Table S2 ). All methods except the baseline learners and MICE PMM are considerably faster when using multithreading, while MissForest and MissARF benefit most from it. 4 Real Data Example As a real data example, we use the diabetes health indicators dataset [ 44 ], where the aim is to predict diabetes from healthcare statistics and lifestyle survey information. The data was collected by the centers for disease control and prevention (CDC) in a health‐related telephone survey behavioral risk factor surveillance system (BRFSS) in 2015. The dataset has 253 680 observations and 21 binary and integer features. The features include, for example, the body mass index (BMI), smoking status, age and education, among others. The outcome is binary, indicating whether a person was ever diagnosed with diabetes or prediabetes ( Y = 1 ) or not ( Y = 0 ), according to a questionnaire. We use a similar approach as in the simulation studies described in Section 3 : We simulate missing data according to MCAR, MAR and MNAR patterns as described in Section 3.1 , 6 impute the datasets with different imputation methods for both single and multiple imputation, and compare those methods with the data NRMSE and Brier score for single imputation as well as coverage rate, average width and coefficient RMSE for multiple imputation. For multiple imputation, we fit a logistic regression model on the complete dataset and use the resulting estimated coefficients β ^ as ground‐truth values to calculate, for example, the coefficient RMSE and the coverage rate. In each replication, we sampled 1000 observations from the total 253 680 observations in the dataset and calculated the regression coefficients, confidence intervals, etc., only on these 1000 observations. However, we estimated the true values for the confidence interval coverage using all 253 680 observations. We deliberately choose such a huge dataset to minimize the variance and to approximate the population parameters β by β ^ . We argue that the variance of the logistic regression on the full dataset with 253 680 observations is negligible in comparison to the variance induced by sampling 1000 observations and by the imputation. Figure 4 shows the results for single imputation: (a) for the data NRMSE and (b) for the Brier score. Generally, the trends observed in the simulated data are also noticeable in the real dataset example. In terms of NRMSE, both MissARF and MissForest show the best performance. They are followed by median imputation and by MICE and MissForest PMM, while random imputation performs worst. Regarding the Brier score, all methods perform equally well. For multiple imputation, the results are shown in Figure 4c for the coverage rate. Average width and coefficient RMSE results are shown in Figure S101 . Generally, all methods perform quite well in terms of the median value in most settings. Concerning the coverage rate (Figure 4c ), MissForest is overly liberal compared to the other methods but the median is still above 90% coverage. At a missingness rate of 0.4, random imputation has a wider interquartile range and therefore performs slightly worse. At a missingness rate of 0.4, MICE PMM, although it has a similar median, has an exceptionally wide range regarding the average width (Figure S101b ) and the RMSE (Figure S101c ), indicating that it performs poorly for some individual variables. FIGURE 4 Real data example results over the different missingness proportions and patterns. (a) MissForest (orange) and MissARF (blue) perform best in terms of NRMSE. (b) The methods perform similarly regarding the Brier Score, with random and median imputation performing slightly worse. The boxplots are plotted over the features. (c) MissARF, MICE PMM (green) and the other methods, except MissForest and random imputation, perform similarly well. The red vertical line shows the nominal coverage level of 0.95. The boxplots are plotted over the replicates. 5 Discussion In this paper, we proposed MissARF, a fast and easy‐to‐use imputation method based on generative modeling that offers both single and multiple imputation. We compared MissARF against state‐of‐the‐art imputation methods on a real data example and on simulated data over different multivariate data distributions in different settings. We found that, in general, MissARF has comparable performance to MissForest in single imputation and to MICE in multiple imputation. In contrast to the competing methods, MissARF does not require any additional computational cost for multiple imputation. In more detail, we observed that, in single imputation, MissARF works best for binary data regardless of the dimensionality for n ∈ { 1000 , 10 000 } and for other distributions MissARF works best in low or moderate dimensions, while MissForest performs better in higher dimensions. In multiple imputation, MissARF generally has comparable performance to MICE PMM, the de facto standard method for multiple imputation. MissARF performs particularly well for squared effects. The rather poor performance of MICE PMM is expected from PMM methods in these cases, as it is documented that other built‐in univariate imputation methods in MICE are recommended for non‐linear effects [ 2 , 45 ]. Here, MICE RF is an alternative, which, however, does not perform as well as MissARF. The exceptional performance of MissARF for binary data in single imputation could be explained by the general strength of ARF for categorical data, as it has a dedicated procedure for this and does not rely on encoding schemes or similar [ 35 , 46 ]. In general, generative approaches have difficulties with high‐dimensional data [ 31 ], which may explain why MissARF currently performs best in low to moderate‐dimensional settings. However, since tree‐based methods are known to scale well with high dimensionality [ 29 ], we see potential in MissARF to be extended and improved for high‐dimensional applications in future work. In some settings of multiple imputation, MissARF has difficulties with higher proportions of missingness. Here, the average interval width of MissARF confidence intervals is comparably small, indicating that the multiple imputation would benefit from a larger diversity of imputed values. A possible solution is to tune ARF with the minimum node size. The larger the leaf node size, the more different variable values are considered for each imputed value, which could be helpful if the missingness rate is high (see additional experiments in Supporting Information Section 5.2 Section 5.1 , where on a fixed example, we compared different minimum node sizes, number of trees and higher number of multiple imputations). That all methods perform poorly for Poisson and gamma distributions with squared effects is not surprising because it is a difficult setting to learn, since these distributions are skewed. With a squared effect, the values get more extreme, which makes imputation more difficult. The performance often gets worse for n = 10 000 . One possible reason for this is that, when n is large, confidence intervals get narrower, so bias induced by the imputation model could lead to non‐coverage more often. In future work, other methods to handle missing values within ARF training could be considered. Several such methods have been proposed [ 7 , 8 ] for RF. However, it is still unclear which methods perform best in different settings. Further, good performance in supervised learning does not necessarily imply good performance in generative models, and a dedicated benchmark of such methods for the generative setting would be necessary. Another option is to handle the missing values before applying ARF, that is, apply another imputation method first. However, by that, the performance of MissARF would depend on a successful pre‐imputation and the imputation uncertainty of the pre‐imputation would be ignored, leading to bias in imputation with ARF. Furthermore, the experiments have not been conducted on smaller sample sizes, which could arise in practice, for example, in clinical research. The performance of all imputation methods decreases with smaller sample sizes and should be addressed in future work (see additional experiments in Supporting Information Section 5.2 , where we compared sample sizes between 50 and 500 on a fixed example). In summary, MissARF offers an imputation solution based on generative modeling that is fast, easy to use, and performs well in both single and multiple imputation. Our method can be used as a general‐purpose imputation approach in many settings. We recommend using MissARF in the following cases: (1) when both performance evaluation and inference are conducted on the same dataset and require a consistent imputation approach; (2) for single imputation in low‐dimensional or binary data settings; and (3) for multiple imputation when missingness is low, squared effects are present, the data distribution is unknown, or a fast runtime is needed—for example, when MICE PMM is unsuitable. Further research is required to improve MissARF's performance in very high dimensional settings and for high missingness proportions. Author Contributions P.G. and M.N.W. performed the experiments. P.G., J.K., D.S.W., and M.N.W. implemented the software. P.G. wrote the first draft. All authors conceived the original idea, discussed the results, and contributed to the final manuscript. Conflicts of Interest The authors declare no conflicts of interest. Supporting information Data S1: Supporting Information. Acknowledgments P.G. and M.N.W. were supported by the German Research Foundation (DFG), Grant Number 437611051. M.N.W. was supported by the German Research Foundation (DFG), Grant Number 459360854. M.N.W. and J.K. were supported by the U Bremen Research Alliance/AI Center for Health Care, financially supported by the Federal State of Bremen. We thank Lukas Burk for running the experiments on the Beartooth Computing Environment [ 47 ] and Kristin Blesch for valuable discussions. Furthermore, we thank Stef van Buuren for valuable discussions and for giving good input for future work. Finally, we thank the anonymous reviewers of Statistics in Medicine for the thorough review, which we believe contributed positively to our work. Open Access funding enabled and organized by Projekt DEAL. ENDNOTES 1 If no leaves can be found, for example, because no leaf satisfies the condition, then the default in the arf package would sample from the entire range of the feature. 2 Implemented in ranger version ≥ 0.17.0 , available on https://github.com/imbs‐hl/ranger and on CRAN . 3 Implemented in arf version ≥ 0.2.3 , available on https://github.com/bips‐hb/arf and on CRAN . 4 Note that MICE and MissForest PMM are constructed for creating valid inference with multiple imputation, therefore not intended for a single imputation application with m = 1 . 5 The number of trees is greater than the default setting in arf for data generation, as we found in smaller simulations that this improves imputation performance (Figures S105 and S106 ). We chose 10 as the minimum node size because this performed well for generating counterfactual explanations in Dandl et al. [ 35 ]. 6 Note, that if the missingness rate exceeds the group size, the missingness rate is adjusted downwards. Data Availability Statement Data sharing is not applicable to this article as no new data were created or analyzed in this study. Analysis and simulation code submitted with the Supporting Information . References 1 D. B. Rubin , “ Inference and Missing Data ,” Biometrika 63 , no. 3 ( 1976 ): 581 – 592 . 2 S. Van Buuren , Flexible Imputation of Missing Data ( CRC Press , 2018 ). 3 G. Molenberghs , G. Fitzmaurice , M. G. Kenward , A. Tsiatis , and G. Verbeke , Handbook of Missing Data Methodology ( CRC Press , 2015 ). 4 L. Breiman , Classification and Regression Trees ( Wadsworth &amp; Brooks/Cole , 1984 ). 5 T. Chen and C. Guestrin , XGBoost: A Scalable Tree Boosting System ( ACM , 2016 ). 6 G. Ke , Q. Meng , T. Finley , et al., “ Lightgbm: A Highly Efficient Gradient Boosting Decision Tree ,” Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 30 ( 2017 ): 3146 – 3154 . 7 F. Tang and H. Ishwaran , “ Random Forest Missing Data Algorithms ,” Statistical Analysis and Data Mining: The ASA Data Science Journal 10 , no. 6 ( 2017 ): 363 – 377 . 10.1002/sam.11348 PMC5796790 29403567 8 J. Josse , J. M. Chen , N. Prost , G. Varoquaux , and E. Scornet , “ On the Consistency of Supervised Learning With Missing Values ,” Statistical Papers 65 ( 2024 ): 1 – 33 . 9 E. Slade and M. G. Naylor , “ A Fair Comparison of Tree‐Based and Parametric Methods in Multiple Imputation by Chained Equations ,” Statistics in Medicine 39 , no. 8 ( 2020 ): 1156 – 1166 . 31997388 10.1002/sim.8468 PMC9136914 10 Y. Cao , H. Allore , B. Vander Wyk , and R. Gutman , “ Review and Evaluation of Imputation Methods for Multivariate Longitudinal Data With Mixed‐Type Incomplete Variables ,” Statistics in Medicine 41 , no. 30 ( 2022 ): 5844 – 5876 . 36220138 10.1002/sim.9592 PMC9771917 11 M. Afkanpour , E. Hosseinzadeh , and H. Tabesh , “ Identify the Most Appropriate Imputation Method for Handling Missing Values in Clinical Structured Datasets: A Systematic Review ,” BMC Medical Research Methodology 24 , no. 1 ( 2024 ): 188 . 39198744 10.1186/s12874-024-02310-6 PMC11351057 12 K. Woźnica and P. Biecek , “ Does Imputation Matter? Benchmark for Real‐Life Classification Problems ,” in ICML Workshop on the Art of Learning With Missing Values (Artemiss) ( ICML Workshop , 2020 ), https://openreview.net/forum?id=mgpPKjaV4k0 . 13 D. Rubin , Multiple Imputation for Nonresponse in Surveys ( John Wiley &amp; Sons , 1987 ). 14 R. Little and D. Rubin , Statistical Analysis With Missing Data , 2nd ed. ( John Wiley &amp; Sons , 2002 ). 15 I. R. White , P. Royston , and A. M. Wood , “ Multiple Imputation Using Chained Equations: Issues and Guidance for Practice ,” Statistics in Medicine 30 , no. 4 ( 2011 ): 377 – 399 . 21225900 10.1002/sim.4067 16 D. J. Stekhoven and P. Bühlmann , “ MissForest—Non‐Parametric Missing Value Imputation for Mixed‐Type Data ,” Bioinformatics 28 , no. 1 ( 2012 ): 112 – 118 . 22039212 10.1093/bioinformatics/btr597 17 L. Breiman , “ Random Forests ,” Machine Learning 45 , no. 1 ( 2001 ): 1 – 33 . 18 D. B. Rubin , “ Multiple Imputation After 18+ Years ,” Journal of the American Statistical Association 91 , no. 434 ( 1996 ): 473 – 489 . 19 S. Van Buuren , “ Multiple Imputation of Discrete and Continuous Data by Fully Conditional Specification ,” Statistical Methods in Medical Research 16 , no. 3 ( 2007 ): 219 – 242 . 17621469 10.1177/0962280206074463 20 S. van Buuren and K. Groothuis‐Oudshoorn , “ Mice: Multivariate Imputation by Chained Equations in R ,” Journal of Statistical Software 45 , no. 3 ( 2011 ): 1 – 67 . 21 M. Mayer , missRanger: Fast Imputation of Missing Values. R Package Version 2.4.0 ( CRAN , 2023 ). 22 OpenAI , “GPT‐4 Technical Report,” preprint, 2023, arXiv:2303.08774 . 23 A. Ramesh , P. Dhariwal , A. Nichol , C. Chu , and M. Chen , “Hierarchical Text‐Conditional Image Generation With CLIP Latents,” preprint, 2022, arXiv:2204.06125 . 24 J. Yoon , J. Jordon , and M. Schaar , “ Gain: Missing Data Imputation Using Generative Adversarial Nets ,” in Proceedings of the 35th International Conference on Machine Learning , vol. 80 , ed. J. Dy and A. Krause ( PMLR , 2018 ), 5689 – 5698 . 25 S. C. X. Li , B. Jiang , and B. Marlin , “ Learning From Incomplete Data With Generative Adversarial Networks ,” in International Conference on Learning Representations ( PMLR , 2019 ). 26 A. Wibisono , Denny , P. Mursanto , and S. See , “ Natural Generative Noise Diffusion Model Imputation ,” Knowledge‐Based Systems 301 ( 2024 ): 112310 . 27 Y. Zhang , R. Zhang , and B. Zhao , “ A Systematic Review of Generative Adversarial Imputation Network in Missing Data Imputation ,” Neural Computing and Applications 35 , no. 27 ( 2023 ): 19685 – 19705 . 28 R. Shahbazian and S. Greco , “ Generative Adversarial Networks Assist Missing Data Imputation: A Comprehensive Survey and Evaluation ,” IEEE Access 11 ( 2023 ): 88908 – 88928 . 29 L. Grinsztajn , E. Oyallon , and G. Varoquaux , “ Why Do Tree‐Based Models Still Outperform Deep Learning on Typical Tabular Data? ,” in Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , vol. 35 , ed. S. Koyejo , S. Mohamed , A. Agarwal , D. Belgrave , K. Cho , and A. Oh ( Curran Associates, Inc ., 2022 ), 507 – 520 . 30 R. Shwartz‐Ziv and A. Armon , “ Tabular Data: Deep Learning Is Not All You Need ,” Information Fusion 81 ( 2022 ): 84 – 90 . 31 D. S. Watson , K. Blesch , J. Kapar , and M. N. Wright , “ Adversarial Random Forests for Density Estimation and Generative Modeling ,” in Proceedings of The 26th International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics , vol. 206 , ed. F. Ruiz , J. Dy , and v. d J W. Meent ( PMLR , 2023 ), 5357 – 5375 . 32 Z. Qian , R. Davis , and v. d M. Schaar , “ Synthcity: A Benchmark Framework for Diverse Use Cases of Tabular Synthetic Data ,” in Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , vol. 36 , ed. A. Oh , T. Naumann , A. Globerson , K. Saenko , M. Hardt , and S. Levine ( Curran Associates, Inc ., 2024 ). 33 T. Shi and S. Horvath , “ Unsupervised Learning With Random Forest Predictors ,” Journal of Computational and Graphical Statistics 15 , no. 1 ( 2006 ): 118 – 138 . 34 I. Goodfellow , J. Pouget‐Abadie , M. Mirza , et al., “ Generative Adversarial Nets ,” in Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , vol. 27 , ed. Z. Ghahramani , M. Welling , C. Cortes , N. Lawrence , and K. Weinberger ( Curran Associates, Inc ., 2014 ). 35 S. Dandl , K. Blesch , T. Freiesleben , et al., “ CountARFactuals–Generating Plausible Model‐Agnostic Counterfactual Explanations With Adversarial Random Forests ,” in World Conference on Explainable Artificial Intelligence , ed. L. Longo , S. Lapuschkin , and C. Seifert ( Springer Nature , 2024 ), 85 – 107 . 36 B. E. Twala , M. Jones , and D. J. Hand , “ Good Methods for Coping With Missing Data in Decision Trees ,” Pattern Recognition Letters 29 , no. 7 ( 2008 ): 950 – 956 . 37 B. Twala and M. Cartwright , “ Ensemble Missing Data Techniques for Software Effort Prediction ,” Intelligent Data Analysis 14 ( 2010 ): 299 – 331 . 38 M. N. Wright and A. Ziegler , “ Ranger: A Fast Implementation of Random Forests for High Dimensional Data in C++ and R ,” Journal of Statistical Software 77 , no. 1 ( 2017 ): 1 – 17 . 39 M. N. Wright , D. S. Watson , K. Blesch , and J. Kapar , arf: Adversarial Random Forests. R Package Version 0.2.0 ( CRAN , 2024 ). 40 K. Goldfeld and J. Wujciak‐Jens , “ Simstudy: Illuminating Research Methods Through Data Generation ,” Journal of Open Source Software 5 , no. 54 ( 2020 ): 2763 . 41 J. W. J. Keith Goldfeld , simstudy: Simulation of Study Data. R Package Version 2.4.0 ( CRAN , 2023 ). 42 T. Rockel , missMethods: Methods for Missing Data. R Package Version 0.4.0 ( CRAN , 2022 ). 43 G. W. Brier , “ Verification of Forecasts Expressed in Terms of Probability ,” Monthly Weather Review 78 , no. 1 ( 1950 ): 1 – 3 . 44 A. Teboul , Diabetes Health Indicators Dataset ( Kaggle , 2021 ), accessed August 2024, https://www.kaggle.com/datasets/alexteboul/diabetes‐health‐indicators‐dataset . 45 L. L. Doove , S. Van Buuren , and E. Dusseldorp , “ Recursive Partitioning for Missing Data Imputation in the Presence of Interaction Effects ,” Computational Statistics &amp; Data Analysis 72 ( 2014 ): 92 – 104 . 46 K. Blesch , N. Koenen , J. Kapar , et al., “Conditional Feature Importance With Generative Modeling Using Adversarial Random Forests,” preprint, arXiv, 2025, arXiv:2501.11178.2025 . 47 Advanced Research Computing Center , Beartooth Computing Environment, x86_64 Cluster ( University of Wyoming , 2025 ), 10.15786/M2FY47 .