pmc Stat Med Stat Med 379 blackwellopen SIM Statistics in Medicine 0277-6715 1097-0258 pmc-is-collection-domain yes pmc-collection-title Wiley Open Access Collection PMC13044994 PMC13044994.1 13044994 13044994 41925052 10.1002/sim.70458 SIM70458 1 Research Article Research Article Flexible yet Sparse Bayesian Survival Models With Time‐Varying Coefficients and Unobserved Heterogeneity Knaus Peter https://orcid.org/0000-0001-6498-7084 1 2 peter.knaus@wu.ac.at Winkler Daniel 3 4 Schoppmann Sebastian F. 5 Jomrich Gerd 5 1 Department of Statistics Harvard University Cambridge Massachusetts USA 2 Institute for Statistics and Mathematics Vienna University of Economics and Business Vienna Austria 3 Institute for Retailing &amp; Data Science Vienna University of Economics and Business Vienna Austria 4 School of Marketing University of New South Wales Kensington New South Wales Australia 5 Department of General Surgery Medical University of Vienna and Gastroesophageal Tumor Unit, Comprehensive Cancer Center (CCC) Vienna Austria * Correspondence: Peter Knaus ( peter.knaus@wu.ac.at ) 02 4 2026 4 2026 45 8-9 510768 10.1002/sim.v45.8-9 e70458 29 12 2025 23 4 2025 09 2 2026 02 04 2026 03 04 2026 03 04 2026 © 2026 The Author(s). Statistics in Medicine published by John Wiley &amp; Sons Ltd. https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/ This is an open access article under the terms of the http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/ License, which permits use, distribution and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited. ABSTRACT Survival analysis is an important area of medical research, yet existing models often struggle to balance simplicity with flexibility. Simple models require minimal adjustments but come with strong assumptions, while more flexible models require significant input and tuning from researchers. We present a survival model using a Bayesian hierarchical shrinkage method that automatically determines whether each covariate should be treated as static, time‐varying, or excluded altogether. This approach strikes a balance between simplicity and flexibility, minimizes the need for tuning, and naturally quantifies uncertainty. The method is supported by an efficient Markov chain Monte Carlo sampler, implemented in the R package shrinkDSM. Comprehensive simulation studies and an application to a clinical dataset involving patients with adenocarcinoma of the gastroesophageal junction showcase the advantages of our approach compared to existing models. hierarchical shrinkage priors piecewise‐exponential model R package state‐space model triple gamma shrinkage prior pmc-status-qastatus 0 pmc-status-live yes pmc-status-embargo no pmc-status-released yes pmc-prop-open-access yes pmc-prop-olf no pmc-prop-manuscript no pmc-prop-legally-suppressed no pmc-prop-has-pdf yes pmc-prop-has-supplement no pmc-prop-pdf-only no pmc-prop-suppress-copyright no pmc-prop-is-real-version no pmc-prop-is-scanned-article no pmc-prop-preprint no pmc-prop-in-epmc yes pmc-license-ref CC BY source-schema-version-number 2.0 cover-date April 2026 details-of-publishers-convertor Converter:WILEY_ML3GV2_TO_JATSPMC version:6.7.3 mode:remove_FC converted:02.04.2026 1 Introduction Survival analysis often deals with data on long timescales. Medical data provides a natural example: Patients are often observed for several years or even decades during a study. In such cases, assuming that covariate effects on the hazard rate remain constant over time may lead to model misspecification. Conversely, allowing all coefficients to vary freely over time can lead to overfitting, introducing spurious variation that obscures the true covariate effects on survival. Thus, models should be able to automatically determine not only which covariates exhibit time‐varying effects but also which should remain constant or be excluded entirely, striking a balance between flexibility and parsimony. The two most widely used approaches to survival analysis fall on opposite ends of this flexibility spectrum. On one end, the Cox proportional‐hazards model [ 1 ] assumes that covariate effects on the hazard rate are constant over time, providing a parsimonious approach for modeling survival. At the other extreme, the Kaplan‐Meier estimator [ 2 ] provides complete flexibility by estimating survival probabilities at each event time without parametric assumptions. However, it does not model covariate effects directly, particularly in the case of continuous or multiple covariates, and can struggle with stratification in high‐dimensional settings. Existing work on balancing flexibility and parsimony in survival models has followed two main approaches: One focusing on variable selection and the other on modeling time variation. The first approach focuses on selecting relevant covariates without modeling time variation, using either penalized likelihood methods [ 3 , 4 , 5 ] or Bayesian variable selection techniques [ 6 , 7 , 8 ]. The second approach increases model flexibility by incorporating time‐varying effects. Prominent examples include the additive model of Aalen [ 9 ], piecewise exponential hazard models [ 10 , 11 ], and various spline‐based approaches [ 12 , 13 ]. Attempts have also been made to unify these approaches, allowing for both variable selection and time‐varying effects [ 14 ]. However, these flexible methods often require extensive hyperparameter tuning and may even necessitate pre‐specifying which variables vary over time [ 13 ], a decision researchers may not be able to make a priori. We propose a Bayesian hierarchical shrinkage‐based method that draws on methods developed for time‐varying parameter models to automatically determine whether covariates should be static, time‐varying, or excluded entirely. Our approach offers several advantages. First, it performs both variable selection (identifying relevant covariates) and variance selection (determining which effects are time‐varying), effectively striking a balance between flexibility and model simplicity. Second, unlike many existing methods, it requires minimal hyperparameter tuning, as all key parameters are inferred from the data. The only exception is the grid size for the time points at which the parameters can vary, which can be selected in a straightforward, data‐driven manner. Parameters can only vary at observed exit points, and the Bayesian hierarchical shrinkage approach is effective even when parameters vary with each observed exit (see Section 2 for details). Third, our fully Bayesian formulation provides a natural framework for quantifying uncertainty, enhancing both predictions and interpretability. To facilitate estimation, we develop an efficient Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) sampler and implement our method in the R package shrinkDSM , providing a user‐friendly tool for researchers seeking a flexible time‐to‐event model with minimal tuning. Additionally, shrinkDSM enables sampling from the posterior predictive distribution of survival times given new covariates. This is a key advantage of absolute risk models over relative risk models, as it allows for direct estimation of survival probabilities rather than hazard ratios. The package also supports time‐varying covariates as inputs and allows for the specification of a time‐varying grouped factor model (see subsection 2.4 ), further extending its applicability. While the package provides helper functions for these features in R, the MCMC is entirely implemented in C++, ensuring fast and efficient sampling. To illustrate the broad applicability of our proposed model, we benchmark it against 8 other models using a comprehensive simulation study. Additionally, we apply the model to a recent dataset involving patients with adenocarcinoma of the gastroesophageal junction, specifically analyzing those who underwent either primary resection or neoadjuvant therapy prior to surgery. This application highlights how our model enhances the understanding of the effects of covariates on survival. The remainder of the paper is structured as follows: Section 2 describes the model components and outlines the MCMC estimation scheme. Section 3 provides an overview of the key features of the R package shrinkDSM . Section 4 presents the simulation study and evaluates the performance of the proposed method. Section 5 applies the method to a clinical dataset, illustrating its real‐world utility. Finally, Section 6 concludes the paper. 2 Model Specification and Estimation 2.1 The Normal Dynamic Survival Model A defining characteristic of survival data is that it often experiences right censoring, which means that the failure time of an individual is not observed. Accordingly, there are two types of observations: Those for which the failure has not yet occurred by the time of the last observation, and those where the last observation aligns with the failure time. An example for these two types of observations in an industrial context is one machine that was still observed to be running at the last inspection and another that failed at a previously observed point. To account for this, each individual i = 1 , … , N is assumed to have both a survival time t i and a censoring time c i , which are independent random variables. The observed data of an individual then consists of the observed survival time y i = m i n ( c i , t i ) , coupled with a failure indicator d i , which is equal to zero if the observation is censored and one otherwise, and a vector of K covariates z i = ( z i 1 , … , z i K ) . In our previous example the machine which had already failed would have d i = 1 and y i = t i , while the one still running would have d j = 0 and y j = c j . The survival times are measured relative to some origin point, such as the date of a medical procedure or the time point at which a machine is put into service. It is not required that the origin point be the same across observations. For example, if patients undergo surgery on different dates, the survival time of each patient would be measured from their date of surgery onwards. The central quantity of interest in much of the survival literature is the hazard rate λ ( t ) , that is, the instantaneous rate of event occurrence λ ( t ) = lim d t → 0 P ( t ≤ t i &lt; t + d t | t i ≥ t ) d t . In the Cox proportional‐hazards model, the hazard is modeled as λ t | z i = exp β 0 ( t ) + ∑ k = 1 K z i k β k , where only the baseline hazard β 0 ( t ) is allowed to vary over time, while the effect of the covariates on the hazard rate is assumed to be constant. Gamerman [ 10 ] extended the Cox model by making both the baseline hazard β 0 as well as the effect of the covariates ( β 1 ( t ) , … , β k ( t ) ) functions of time, that is, λ t | z i = exp β 0 ( t ) + ∑ k = 1 K z i k β k ( t ) . The benefit of this extension is twofold: The first and obvious advantage is that the effect of the covariates can change throughout the observed survival time. A second, somewhat less obvious benefit, is that the model changes from a relative risk model to an absolute risk model, allowing for the estimation of a baseline hazard as well as the prediction of survival times given new covariate values. As proposed by Gamerman [ 10 ], the dynamic survival model is a piecewise exponential model for lifetimes. The underlying assumption is that a given set 𝒮 = s 0 = 0 , s 1 , … , s J , s 0 &lt; s 1 &lt; ⋯ &lt; s J partitions the survival time axis into J intervals s 0 , s 1 , … , s J − 1 , s J , relative to the individual origin points. Within an interval, the hazard is assumed to be constant. More formally, the baseline log‐hazard and covariate effects β k ( t ) , for k = 0 , … , K , are defined by the piecewise constant functions β k ( t ) = β k j , for t ∈ ( s j − 1 , s j ] . This, in turn, implies that the hazard also has a piecewise constant form: (1) λ ( t | z i ; t ∈ ( s j − 1 , s j ] ) = λ i j = exp β 0 j + ∑ k = 1 K z i k β k j . In principle, as long as there is a value for each covariate, interval, and individual, the covariates can also vary over time, that is: (2) λ ( t | z i j ; t ∈ ( s j − 1 , s j ] ) = λ i j = exp β 0 j + ∑ k = 1 K z i j k β k j . While the software introduced in Section 3 supports this, nothing fundamental about the model itself changes and therefore, to simplify notation, the interval index for the covariates will be omitted. Since the partition of the time axis is fixed, its choice can significantly impact model fit, particularly if selected poorly. When a theoretical basis exists for a specific grid, it provides a natural choice. However, in many cases, no such basis is available. A simple solution is to use equally spaced intervals, but this can be problematic when event times are unevenly distributed, as the number of observations per interval may vary widely. To see why this can be an issue, consider a time interval that contains no observed events. In this case, the posterior is informed solely by the prior, as no data is available to provide direct information. A more sensible, data‐driven approach is to place grid points whenever a fixed number of events have been observed (e.g., every two events). This ensures that all intervals contain the same amount of event‐based information, improving stability and interpretability. This approach is implemented in the R package shrinkDSM via the divisionpoints function. An important component of the model is the choice of stochastic process that governs the evolution of the β k j 's from one time interval to the next. Following Hemming and Shaw [ 15 ], we consider the normal dynamic survival model, in which the covariate effects evolve according to Gaussian random walks, that is: (3) β k j = β k , j − 1 + w k j , w k j ∼ 𝒩 0 , θ k , where the initial parameter value β k 0 is assumed to come from a normal distribution with mean β k and variance θ k , that is, β k 0 ∼ 𝒩 ( β k , θ k ) . The random walk specification assumes that the effect of covariates in neighboring intervals will not be vastly different from each other, thereby imposing a degree of smoothness. θ k , that is, the variance of the innovations w k j , plays a vital role in the degree of smoothness that is imposed through the random walk specification. Large variances allow for larger innovation values, thereby implying less similarity in the effect of the covariates on the hazard rate in neighboring intervals, while the inverse holds true for small variances. Because θ k is constant over time, the prior enforces a single level of smoothness for each covariate across all intervals. This implies a global decision between static and time‐varying effects rather than time‐local activation patterns. Taking this idea further, three interesting special cases arise out of the random walk specification. These can be differentiated based on whether the mean of the initial value β k 0 (i.e., β k ), and/or the variance of the innovations (i.e., θ k ), are equal to zero. The baseline is the case where both β k ≠ 0 and θ k ≠ 0 . This implies that the covariate associated with this parameter already has an effect on the hazard at the origin and that this effect varies over time. The second case is when β k ≠ 0 but θ k = 0 , resulting in a random walk where β k j = β k , j − 1 = ⋯ = β k with probability one. This means that the corresponding covariate has an effect on the hazard rate, however this effect remains constant at β k over time. The third and final interesting case is when both β k = 0 and θ k = 0 . In this case β k 0 = 0 and all subsequent values β k j = β k 0 = 0 with probability one. Thus the covariate has no effect on the hazard and this does not change over time, effectively removing this covariate from the model. A visual example of each of these cases is shown in Figure 1 . Given a tool that can automatically differentiate between these cases leads to a setup that can choose which covariates to include and which to allow to vary over time. FIGURE 1 Exemplary evolution of the effect of three covariates on the hazard rate. The top figure is an example of a parameter β k j associated with a covariate that has a time‐varying effect, while the bottom left and bottom right display β k j 's where the covariate's effect is significant and non time‐varying and insignificant and non time‐varying, respectively. 2.2 Global‐Local Shrinkage Priors for Variable and Variance Selection Pulling β k and θ k towards zero is a well studied problem in the realm of time‐varying parameter models. A long string of literature uses various global‐local shrinkage priors to effectively pull θ k and β k towards zero where the data does not protest (see, e.g., [ 16 , 17 , 18 ]). Despite their proven performance in differentiating between time‐varying and constant parameters, this ability has not yet been introduced in the context of dynamic survival models. A general global‐local shrinkage prior [ 19 ] for a parameter β k takes the following form: (4) β k | τ β , λ k β ∼ N 0 , λ k β τ β , λ k β ∼ p λ β ( λ k β ) , τ β ∼ p τ β ( τ β ) , where λ k β represents the local parameter, while τ β is the global shrinkage parameter. The intuition behind such priors is that the global parameter pulls all coefficients towards zero, while the local parameters allow individual parameters to escape this pull, where warranted by the data. Different choices for the distribution of λ k β and τ β determine the characteristics of the shrinkage prior, with common choices being the Bayesian Lasso [ 20 ], the normal‐gamma prior [ 21 ] or the horseshoe prior [ 22 ]. While this works well for pulling the mean of the initial value β k towards zero, the θ k 's are variance parameters, and thus only live on ℝ + . Frühwirth‐Schnatter and Wagner [ 23 ] adapted global‐local shrinkage priors of the form ( 4 ) to variance parameters in the context of time‐varying parameter models by introducing a non‐centered parameterization, which led to a square transform version of global local shrinkage priors. If a random variable X comes from the prior structure defined by ( 4 ) and we set θ k = X 2 , then (5) θ k | τ θ , λ k θ ∼ G 1 2 , 1 2 λ k θ τ θ , λ k θ ∼ p λ θ ( λ k θ ) , τ θ ∼ p τ θ ( τ θ ) . This defines a class of global‐local shrinkage priors specifically for variance parameters, depending on the choice of distribution for λ k θ and τ θ . Our choices for λ k β , λ k θ , τ β and τ θ , follow Cadonna and colleagues [ 18 ] and employ the triple gamma shrinkage prior, which can be represented as (6) θ k | τ θ , λ k θ ∼ G 1 2 , 1 2 λ k θ τ θ , λ k θ ∼ F 2 a θ , 2 c θ , τ θ ∼ F 2 c θ , 2 a θ , where F ( d 1 , d 2 ) is the F‐distribution with d 1 and d 2 degrees of freedom. Similarly, we place the variable selection twin of the triple gamma prior, the normal‐gamma‐gamma prior [ 24 ], on the mean of the initial value β k : (7) β k | τ β , λ k β ∼ N 0 , λ k β τ β , λ k β ∼ F 2 a β , 2 c β , τ β ∼ F 2 c β , 2 a β . The prior can be seen as a strong choice for two main reasons. First, it allows for fairly granular control over the shrinkage characteristics of the prior, as the parameters a θ ( a β ) and c θ ( c β ) explicitly control behavior of the prior around zero and in the tails, respectively. More concretely, smaller values of a θ ( a β ) lead to a prior that places more mass around zero, leading to heavier shrinkage of smaller parameter values. In particular, values of a θ ( a β ) smaller than 0.5 lead to prior that is unbounded at zero, implying strong shrinkage around the origin. Conversely, smaller values of c θ ( c β ) lead to a prior that places more mass in the tails, thereby incurring less of a shrinkage penalty for large parameter values. These two hyperparameters in tandem can therefore ensure that noise is properly squelched, while signal can filter through. Second, it can be considered a fairly generic prior, as it subsumes many popular prior choices, such as the horseshoe [ 22 ], the Bayesian Lasso [ 20 ], the normal‐gamma [ 21 ] and a simple Gaussian prior. Interested readers are referred to [ 18 ] for a more in‐depth discussion, in particular due to the focus on Gaussian state space models. Placing priors on the global parameters a θ , c θ , a β and c β allows them to be learned from the data and gives the model the ability to adapt to the level of sparsity in any given dataset. Here, we follow Cadonna and colleagues [ 18 ] and set scaled beta distributions as priors: 2 a θ ∼ ℬ α a θ , β a θ , 2 c θ ∼ ℬ α c θ , β c θ , 2 a β ∼ ℬ α a β , β a β , 2 c β ∼ ℬ α c β , β c β . These distributions force the parameters to stay in the range ( 0 , 0 . 5 ) . As discussed above, this leads to a prior that induces heavy shrinkage near zero, while still allowing for heavy enough tails to let signals filter through. 2.3 Estimation Procedure Estimation of the unknown parameters is done through MCMC. We extend the approach proposed by Wagner [ 11 ], which uses data augmentation to enable Gibbs sampling and avoid metropolis‐hastings (MH) steps where possible. While this is feasible for most parameters, the conditional posteriors of a θ , c θ , a β and c β are not of well‐known form and therefore require MH‐within‐Gibbs steps. The sampler also leans on ideas from Bitto and Frühwirth‐Schnatter [ 17 ] and Cadonna et al. [ 18 ] for sampling steps of parameters associated with the shrinkage priors. The core idea behind the sampler is to use data augmentation to cast the model into a conditionally Gaussian state space form, a class of models for which a wealth of efficient sampling algorithms exist. As such, we only elaborate on the data augmentation scheme in the following section and refer the interested reader to the Appendix for the full MCMC algorithm. 2.3.1 Data Augmentation A key ingredient of the MCMC sampler is the data augmentation scheme introduced by Wagner [ 11 ]. She shows that the model can be cast into a conditionally Gaussian state space form through the use of a mixture approximation of the standard Gumbel distribution (also known as the generalized extreme value distribution Type‐I). Beyond simply avoiding MH steps, this allows the use of one‐block samplers for the β k j 's with tools such as forward‐filtering, backward‐sampling [ 25 , 26 ] and related algorithms (e.g., [ 27 ]). We define u i j as the survival time of individual i within the time interval j = ( s j − 1 , s j ] . Each individual for which failure is not observed by the end of the interval is considered right censored, with the censoring point at s j . To capture the censoring, a residual survival time ξ i j is added to each censored observation u i j . This gives rise to the total survival time τ i j = u i j + ξ i j of individual i in period j . Due to the memorylessness of the exponential distribution, the residual survival time also follows an exponential Ex ( λ i j ) distribution, conditional on τ i j &gt; u i j . Thus one can write these auxiliary survival times as τ i j = u i j + ξ i j , ξ i j ∼ Ex ( λ i j ) for j = 1 , … , l i − 1 , with the form of the final auxiliary survival time depending again on the indicator d i : τ i l i = u i l i if d i = 1 , u i l i + ξ i l i , ξ i l i ∼ Ex ( λ i l i ) if d i = 0 . Represented this way, the normal dynamic survival model can be viewed as a generalized dynamic linear model, where the observations are conditionally exponentially distributed with the hazard rate λ i j acting as the rate parameter: τ i j | β j ∼ Ex exp z i β j , β j = β j − 1 + ω j , ω j ∼ N ( 0 , Q ( θ ) ) . In this notation, the baseline hazard is absorbed into β j = ( β 0 j , β 1 j , … , β K j ) ′ , implying that an intercept term is added to z i = ( 1 , z i 1 , … , z i K ) . The variances of the innovations are collected in the diagonal matrix Q ( θ ) = diag ( θ 0 , θ 1 , … , θ K ) , which also makes the assumption that the random walks evolve independently of one another explicit. Taking the log of the observation equation transforms it to be linear: − ln τ i j = z i β j + ϵ i j , where ϵ i j now follows a standard Gumbel distribution. [ 28 ] show that this distribution can be approximated very closely through a mixture of 10 normal distributions. p ϵ ( ϵ ) = exp ( − ϵ − exp ( − ϵ ) ) ≈ ∑ r = 1 10 w r f N ϵ ; m r , v r . The parameters of the mixture distribution, that is, the weights w r , the means m r and the variances v r , are determined by minimizing the Kullback–Leibler divergence from the approximating mixture to the Gumbel distribution. The exact values can be found in Table 1 in [ 28 ]. After introducing the component indicators r i j ∈ { 1 , … , 10 } , the model can be written in conditionally Gaussian state space form: − ln τ i j = z i β j + m r i j + ε r i j , ε r i j ∼ N 0 , v r i j . This concept can be illustrated more clearly by consolidating all observations still at risk, that is, those that have not yet exited due to failure or censoring, at the beginning of a given interval into a single equation. To this end, let n j be all observations still at risk in a given interval j . Furthermore, assume that the vector of observed survival times y is sorted from longest to shortest, with y 1 being the longest and y N being the shortest, and that the rows of the design matrix Z were ordered with the same key. Then, through defining a latent vector x j as x j = − ln τ 1 j − m r 1 , j ⋮ − ln τ n j , j − m r n j , j , and ε j = ε r 1 , j , … , ε r n j , j ′ , the model can be written in the following conditionally Gaussian state space form (8) x j = Z j β j + ε j , ε j ∼ N 0 , V j , β j = β j − 1 + ω j , ω j ∼ N ( 0 , Q ( θ ) ) , where V j = diag v r 1 j , … , v r n j , j and Z j consists of the first n j rows of the reordered design matrix, including the intercept column: Z j = z 1 ⋮ z n j . Thus, using these data augmentation steps, it is possible to represent the normal dynamic survival model defined in ( 1 ) and ( 3 ) as a conditionally Gaussian state space model ( 8 ), opening up the possibility to use sampling procedures from this well understood class of models. The interested reader is referred to the Appendix for the full MCMC algorithm. 2.4 Extension to a Time‐Varying Grouped Factor Model To account for unobserved heterogeneity that may be present in the augmented survival times in the form of covariance, we additionally add a grouped factor component to the hazard rates. Let observation i belong to group g , with g ∈ { 1 , … , G } . Note that this grouping is assumed to be observed and is not estimated from the data. Then, when the factor component is added, the hazard rates look as follows: λ i j = exp ϕ g f j + β 0 j + ∑ k = 1 K z i k β k j , where f j is a single latent factor which is allowed to vary over time according to a zero‐mean stochastic volatility law of motion: f j | h j ∼ 𝒩 0 , exp ( h j ) , h j | h j − 1 , ϕ s v , σ f 2 ∼ 𝒩 ϕ s v h j − 1 , σ f 2 , h 0 | ϕ s v , σ f 2 ∼ 𝒩 0 , σ f 2 / 1 − ( ϕ s v ) 2 . This specification has similarities with shared frailty models [ 29 ], with the special case G = N closely related to regular (i.e., individual level) frailty models [ 30 ]. A key difference lies in the stochastic volatility specification, as it allows for time variation in the frailty term, whereas standard frailty models usually assume that the term remains constant over time. Frailty models are random effect models applied in the context of time‐to‐event analysis, where the aim is to capture unobserved heterogeneity. Such unobserved heterogeneity, where it impacts the outcome variable, can induce spurious time‐dependent effects of covariates through a selection effect [ 31 ]. This effect also has ramifications for the identifiability of frailty terms in models with time‐varying parameters, as, without strict assumptions, it is not possible to determine whether time‐variation comes from individual frailty or through a truly time‐varying effect. In the context of a time‐varying parameter model, frailty is therefore particularly useful in the shared frailty specification, where multiple observations share a single frailty term, as this alleviates the identifiability issues. A common example of an application for such a shared frailty model is a scenario where repeated measurements are taken, as the shared frailty term can account for unobserved individual heterogeneity. In this specification, the signs of the factor loadings ϕ 1 , … , ϕ G and the factor f j are not identified. To demonstrate this, let ϕ be the vector of factor loadings for all individuals. Then ϕ f j = ( − ϕ ) ( − f j ) . To remedy this, we first run the MCMC sampler in the unrestricted space and then enforce identification post‐hoc through the methods described in Frühwirth‐Schnatter et al. [ 32 ] and Lopes and West [ 33 ]. In the one‐dimensional case (as it appears above), this amounts to ensuring that ϕ 1 is always positive. In specifying the priors for the parameters governing the stochastic volatility process, we follow Kastner [ 34 ]: ϕ s v + 1 / 2 | a s v , b s v ∼ ℬ a s v , b s v , σ f 2 | B s v ∼ 𝒢 1 / 2 , 1 / 2 B s v . To ensure sparsity in the factor loadings, we place triple gamma shrinkage priors on the factor loadings, analogous to those used in Section 2.2 : ϕ g | a ϕ , c ϕ , τ ϕ ∼ T G ( a ϕ , c ϕ , τ ϕ ) . Naturally, as in Section 2.2 , this includes all special and limiting cases of the triple gamma prior, allowing for a large degree in flexibility in terms of the amount of shrinkage applied. Similarly, the hyperpriors are also specified in an analogous fashion to those in Section 2.2 . This approach has similarities to that proposed by Kastner [ 35 ], albeit with a more general choice of shrinkage prior. This estimation can be extended straightforwardly to account for the additional factor component, thanks to the flexible nature of MCMC. The additional steps required are described in detail in Algorithm 2 , 2 in the Appendix. 3 R Package shrinkDSM The methods described are implemented in the R package shrinkDSM [ 36 ], offering an efficient yet easy‐to‐use tool for estimating piecewise exponential dynamic survival models. It aims to have a low barrier to entry, while still being flexible enough for more advanced users. This is achieved by choosing sensible default values for the hyperparameters, while allowing the user to modify the prior setup in fairly deep ways, should they so desire. The resulting software works well for a wide variety of datasets, requires very little tuning and leads to a default model that can be estimated in only a few lines: More advanced users can modify the prior setup (e.g., change the class of prior used, modify hyperparameters or even deactivate the learning of certain hyperparameters) in a fashion analogous to the methods presented by Knaus and colleagues [ 37 ], as the underlying Gaussian state space model is very similar. While this similarity leads to many of the methods carrying over, a distinction lies in the factor model, which is only present in the model described in this paper. To add a factor to the model, a grouping variable is supplied via the argument groups . Then, the prior setup for ϕ 1 , … , ϕ G can be modified via the argument phi_param : The arguments provided in the named list for phi_param behave in the same fashion as those for the variances of the innovations and the means of the initial states, albeit with the suffix _phi . A further goal is to combine the benefits of the low‐level (and therefore fast) programming language C++ with those of the higher level language R , with its interpreted code and rich suite of data wrangling software. All computationally intensive code is implemented in C++ and then interfaced with R via the Rcpp [ 38 ] package. Code dealing with plotting and interpreting results, as well as checking MCMC convergence, is then written in R , allowing for easy interfacing with other R packages (e.g., coda [ 39 ]). Furthermore, forecasting of survival times based on new covariates and the use of time‐varying covariates is supported. 4 Simulation Study To evaluate the performance of the proposed model, we benchmark it against a set of competing methods in a simulation study. 4.1 Simulation Setup and Competing Methods The synthetic data is generated under three different data‐generating processes (DGPs), each differing in the functional form of the regression coefficients: Constant DGP : The coefficients remain constant over time, corresponding to the standard Cox proportional hazards model. Sinusoidal DGP : The coefficients follow a sinusoidal function of continuous time: β k ( t ) = 5 sin 2 π 100 t − s k , where s k is a phase shift drawn from a uniform distribution over [ 0 , 1 . 6 π ] . Under this specification, each coefficient completes a full oscillation every 100 time units. Tanh DGP : The coefficients follow a hyperbolic tangent function: β k ( t ) = d k · 5 tanh 5 100 ( t − i k ) , where d k ∈ { − 1 , 1 } determines whether the transition is increasing ( d k = 1 ) or decreasing ( d k = − 1 ), and i k is the inflection point, randomly drawn from [ 0 , 100 ] . Examples of coefficient trajectories under these DGPs are shown in Figure 2 . FIGURE 2 Examples of coefficient trajectories over time for different DGPs in the simulation study. Each panel represents a different DGP: Constant, sinusoidal, and hyperbolic tangent. Beyond the different DGPs, the simulations vary along the following dimensions: Sparsity levels : s ∈ { 0 . 5 , 0 . 9 } . Dimensionality : The number of covariates, K ∈ { 10 , 25 , 50 } . Sample sizes : The number of observations, N ∈ { 100 , 200 , 500 } . The covariates are drawn from a standard normal distribution, that is, z i k ∼ 𝒩 ( 0 , 1 ) . To introduce sparsity, a fraction s of coefficients is set to zero, meaning ⌊ s · K ⌋ coefficients are randomly zeroed out in each simulation repetition. Survival times are generated in three steps: Time discretization : The time axis from t = 0 to t = 100 is divided into 5000 equally spaced intervals of size 0.02. This ensures a fine‐grained approximation of continuous‐time survival models while remaining computationally efficient. Hazard calculation : At each time step, the covariate‐driven hazard multiplier is computed as λ cov = exp ∑ k = 1 K z i k β k j . The baseline hazard is dynamically scaled at each step to normalize for covariate effects, ensuring that the overall hazard remains comparable across DGPs and results in a censoring proportion of approximately 30%. Survival time simulation : Given the hazard function, survival times are drawn from a piecewise exponential distribution, assuming the hazard remains constant within each interval. Due to the high resolution of the time grid, this closely approximates a continuous‐time survival model. Each combination of DGP, sparsity, dimensionality and sample size is repeated 50 times. Model performance is evaluated using the concordance index (C‐index), calculated on 1000 out‐of‐sample observations. For models with time‐varying coefficients, risk scores are computed as the negative mean survival time, averaged over 10,000 posterior predictions. This ensures that risk scores reflect the expected survival trajectory while remaining comparable across models. For models with constant coefficients, the C‐index is computed based on their respective estimated risk scores. The C‐index measures the proportion of concordant observation pairs, that is, pairs where the individual with the shorter survival time also has a higher risk score. An overview of the competing methods can be found in Table 1 . TABLE 1 Overview of R packages and functions used in the simulation study. R package R function Function settings (if different from default) Penalized Time‐varying dynsurv [ 40 ] bayesCox Grid set at every third observed event, default AR(1) prior for coefficients. X X timereg [ 41 ] aalen 1000 simulations used for resampling. X rstpm2 [ 42 ] pstpm2 All coefficients estimated as penalized splines. X X BSGW [ 43 ] bsgw Function defaults. X survival [ 44 ] coxph Maximum 1000 iterations for convergence. pch [ 45 ] pchreg Function defaults. X ranger [ 46 ] ranger splitrule set to extratrees , mtry set to 4, importance set to permutation . (X) glmnet [ 47 , 48 ] cv.glmnet Cross‐validation measure set to concordance index. Lasso penalty ( α = 1 ) used to enforce sparsity. X The proposed model is estimated using a Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) algorithm with 50,000 iterations, a burn‐in of 10,000, and thinning of 10. The piecewise exponential model grid is set at every second observed event. The prior setup is as described in Section 2.2 , with the hyperparameters for the shrinkage priors set to α a β = α c β = 5 , β a θ = β c θ = 10 . This choice of hyperparameters favors smaller values of a β , a θ , c β , and c θ , leading to a shrinkage prior with a highly pronounced peak at zero and heavy tails, which is particularly useful in high‐dimensional settings. 4.2 Results The simulation results are presented in Figures 3 and 4 . FIGURE 3 Distribution of concordance index over 50 repetitions under the constant and sinusoidal DGP. Models are ordered by the median concordance index across all simulations. The proposed method is on the far right. FIGURE 4 Distribution of concordance index over 50 repetitions under the tanh DGP. Models are ordered by the median concordance index across all simulations. The proposed method is on the far right. The proposed method performs consistently well across all scenarios, either outperforming or remaining competitive with alternative approaches. Its advantage is particularly pronounced in settings where the true DGP involves time‐varying coefficients, as seen in the sinusoidal and tanh DGPs. Interestingly, competing methods that explicitly model time variation ( bayesCox , aalen , pstpm2 , pchreg ) do not consistently outperform methods that assume constant coefficients, even when penalization is applied ( pstpm2 ). This suggests that standard approaches to incorporating time variation may not be sufficient in high‐dimensional or sparse settings, where adaptive shrinkage is crucial to prevent overfitting. This strong performance of the proposed method in time‐varying settings is expected. More notably, however, it remains competitive in the constant DGP, demonstrating that the hierarchical shrinkage prior effectively suppresses unnecessary flexibility when time‐varying effects are absent. This suggests that the model successfully balances adaptivity and regularization, avoiding overfitting in cases where a simpler model would suffice. Moreover, even when the underlying coefficients are truly constant, the triple gamma prior effectively performs variable selection, as demonstrated by the strong performance in high‐dimensional and highly sparse settings. This indicates that the proposed approach is not just a flexible alternative to existing models but a robust method that adapts to the structure of the data without excessive tuning. Overall, the proposed method hedges against model misspecification, performing well regardless of whether the true underlying DGP exhibits time variation. This adaptability makes the method particularly valuable in real‐world applications, where the presence of time variation is unknown and misspecification risks are high. 5 Application to a Data Set of Patients With Adenocarcinoma of the Gastroesophageal Junction Esophageal cancer (EC) is the eighth most common cancer worldwide, with less than 20% of patients surviving more than five years. Whereas in western countries the number of esophageal squamous cell carcinoma (ESCC) is declining, the number of adenocarcinomas of the esophagogastric junction (AEG) diagnosed is increasing [ 49 ]. Despite the development of multimodal approaches, combining surgical resection with perioperative chemo‐(radio)therapy, 5‐year survival rate for patients diagnosed with AEG remains poor [ 50 ]. Inflammation, as one of the hallmarks of cancer, is an acknowledged factor in tumor biology. Inflammation‐driven tumorigenesis and tumor progression plays a crucial role in malignant diseases. Systemic inflammatory response (SIR) in the context of tumor‐associated inflammation has been demonstrated to diminish outcome and be of major prognostic importance in various cancers. Investigation of tumor‐driving inflammation‐based components is of major importance and targeting pathways of inflammatory response might become a cornerstone of cancer treatment [ 51 ]. Therefore, identification of easy‐available markers might help to determine individual treatment approaches. The utility of inflammation‐based scores, such as the systemic immune‐inflammation index (SII), are based on routinely obtained markers that are available before surgery. Elevated SII has been reported to be associated with clinico‐pathological parameters and has been proven to be an independent prognostic factor in a number of malignancies [ 52 , 53 , 54 ]. In the present application, we investigate the prognostic value of SII in patients with adenocarcinoma of the gastroesophageal junction who underwent primary resection or were treated with neoadjuvant therapy before surgery. The data set consists of the survival time (in months) of 287 consecutive patients that underwent curative resection of locally advanced adenocarcinomas of the gastroesophageal junction between January 1992 and April 2016 at the Department of Surgery at the Medical University of Vienna. Serum concentrations of platelets, neutrophils, and lymphocytes were measured within 3 days before the start of neoadjuvant treatment or surgery in patients treated with primary surgery. The SII is calculated as follows: SII = platelet ∗ neutrophil lymphocyte . In addition to the SII several common control variables described in Table 2 are used for estimation. The sampler is run for 100.000 iterations with a burn‐in of 20.000 iterations and a thinning factor of 20. Both θ k and β k are placed under a triple gamma prior, with the default hyperparameters from Winkler and Knaus [ 36 ]. The partitioning set S contains every observed death. TABLE 2 Description of explanatory variables used in application. Variable Description SII Systemic immune inflammation index Age Age at the beginning of treatment Sex Female = 0, male = 1 cT Clinical tumor stage cN Clinical lymph node stage ASA American Society of Anesthesiologists physical status classification G Tumor differentiation The plots in the first row of Figure 5 show the posterior parameter associated with SII for patients who were treated with primary surgery and neoadjuvant treatment, respectively. The shaded blue area represent the pointwise 50% and 95% credible intervals. The risk associated with SII increases over the first 10 months for both groups after starting treatment (either surgery for primary resected patients or neoadjuvant treatment) and decreases after the initial peak. However, while the parameter becomes statistically indistinguishable from zero for patients who underwent primary resection after ∼ 6 years, it stays constant with a median around one for those who received neoadjuvant therapy. A Cox proportional‐hazards model estimated with the same data set (Table 3 ) is unable to capture this time‐variation and simply results in a smaller estimate for primary resected patients. Thus the proposed model results in two important interpretative differences: First, the parameters associated with SII for the two groups are practically indistinguishable for the first two years. Second, while SII remains an important factor for survival in patients receiving neoadjuvant chemotherapy, it is only important for the first six years or so for those undergoing primary resection. FIGURE 5 Posterior parameters associated with systemic immune‐inflammation index (SII) and clinical lymphnode stage (cN) for primary resected and neoadjuvant treated patients over time. Black lines represent posterior medians, while shaded areas represent 95% and 50% pointwise credible intervals. TABLE 3 Parameters estimated using the Cox proportional‐hazards model. Dependent variable Survival time (Neoadjuvant) (Primary resection) scaled SII 1.250 1.024 (0.137) (0.104) cT2 0.203 (0.248) cT3 0.347 (0.236) cT1 −0.248 (0.271) cN2 0.032 0.387 (0.335) (0.369) cN3 −0.252 (0.730) cN0 −0.009 −1.237 (0.322) (0.260) age −0.017 0.012 (0.011) (0.010) sex0 −0.225 0.401 (0.345) (0.238) G0,1,2 −0.141 (0.231) G2 −0.600 (0.226) G1 −1.167 (0.652) ASA1 0.104 0.137 (0.254) (0.315) ASA3&amp;4 0.533 −0.339 (0.316) (0.324) Observations 150 162 R 0.481 0.593 Max. possible R 0.996 0.998 Log likelihood −361.742 −450.474 Wald test 98.000 (df = 9) 131.470 (df = 12) LR test 98.460 (df = 9) 145.467 (df = 12) Score (Logrank) test 109.909 (df = 9) 164.954 (df = 12) Note: p &lt; 0.1; p &lt; 0.05; p &lt; 0.01 SE in parentheses. To showcase that constant parameters can also be captured with the proposed model, the posterior parameters associated with the clinical lymph node stage (cN) are also included in Figure 5 . All parameters that appear as statistically insignificant at the standard 5% level according to the Cox PH model are also shrunk to zero throughout the entire observed time period using our Bayesian approach. Furthermore, the parameter associated with cN = 0 is significantly below zero in the Cox PH model ( z − s c o r e = − 4 . 761 ). In the proposed model the vast majority of posterior mass is around − 1 and displays virtually no time‐variation. Crucially, the time‐variation afforded by the model also allows for more nuanced interpretations of the effect of SII on survival time. Figure 6 shows the posterior distribution of the coefficient associated with SII for primary resected and neoadjuvant treated patients in the first 36 months. Were a practitioner to guide their attention to patients based solely on the estimates from the Cox proportional hazards model, they would conclude that those that undergo primary resection are at higher risk than those that receive neoadjuvant treatment. However, in approximately the first 10 months, the model gives credence to the opposite conclusion, with the effect reversing around the 17 month mark. Especially at the beginning of treatment, this may have important implications for outcomes of patients. FIGURE 6 Posterior distribution of the coefficient associated with SII parameter for primary resected and neoadjuvant treated patients in the first 36 months. Lines represent the posterior median, while shaded regions represent 95% credible intervals. Horizontal lines represent the corresponding estimates of the Cox proportional‐hazards model. This example highlights the importance of the time‐varying parameter approach when it comes to understanding the effect of SII on survival time. The proposed model is shown to be flexible enough to capture both constant and time‐varying parameters while also giving a clear indication of which parameters should be included in the model without the need for much hyperparameter tuning. 6 Conclusion This paper presents a flexible yet sparse Bayesian model for survival analysis, combining a piecewise‐exponential hazard model with a shared frailty term and modern shrinkage priors. This provides theoretical and practical advantages. The flexible model structure allows for time‐variation in the effects of covariates, which is crucial in many real‐world applications in medicine. In existing methods, this flexibility often comes at the cost of requiring extensive hyper‐parameter tuning or prior knowledge about the parameter space to make estimation possible. However, the triple gamma shrinkage prior applied in our model can learn the level of sparsity directly from the data while still allowing researchers to easily control shrinkage by setting interpretable hyperparameters if so desired. Our model applies shrinkage to both the covariate effects on the hazard and the variance of the innovations governing time variation, thereby identifying which covariates affect survival and determining whether their impacts evolve over time. The presented simulation study shows that it outperforms existing methods for time‐varying effects across different levels of sparsity, dimensionality, and sample size, thereby highlighting the practical advantages of the proposed model. Furthermore, even in simulations with constant parameters, it remains among the best‐performing methods. This demonstrates that our approach can effectively balance flexibility and model simplicity, allowing researchers to apply the model across various settings while avoiding restrictive assumptions about the underlying DGP (e.g., constant parameters). The application to a data set of patients with adenocarcinoma of the gastroesophageal junction demonstrates the practical advantages of the model's flexibility. Comparing the effects of SII on neoadjuvant‐treated and primary resected patients, the time variation in effects reveals important heterogeneity not captured by models assuming constant hazard. The proposed model is implemented in the R package shrinkDSM , available on CRAN, providing an easy‐to‐use tool for researchers. The efficient MCMC algorithm is fully implemented in C++ , ensuring reasonably fast sampling. 6.1 Limitations and Potential Extensions The current specification makes several deliberate choices that keep the model tractable but also highlight avenues for future work. First, the innovation variance θ k in the random walk specification is constant over time for each covariate. This prior structure induces a global decision for each covariate between a static and a time‐varying effect. It does not encode “local activation” patterns in which an effect is essentially null for certain time windows and active in others. A natural extension would be to incorporate dynamic shrinkage [ 55 , 56 , 57 ], where θ k becomes θ k t and is governed by its own stochastic process. This framework encourages most innovations to be close to zero while allowing occasional bursts of activity. The result is richer temporal patterns in the covariate effects, including local activation and temporary spikes. The trade‐off is increased complexity in both the prior specification and the MCMC algorithm, which falls outside the scope of the current work. A further potential extension is the use of shape constraints. The present setup prioritizes flexibility, sparsity, and ease of use, but does not incorporate prior information about the shape of the hazard or covariate effects. In some clinical applications, prior knowledge may suggest that the hazard contribution of a covariate is monotone over time (for example, decreasing hazard after treatment). One way to incorporate such information would be to reparameterize the hazard in terms of cumulative increments and place shrinkage priors on these increments under an isotonic constraint, in line with recent work on locally adaptive Bayesian isotonic regression [ 58 ]. While conceptually straightforward, this extension would require dedicated methodological and computational development and is therefore left for future work. In summary, we present an efficient model for survival analysis that combines ease of use with flexibility and strong theoretical underpinnings. The model is particularly well‐suited for applications in which researchers are not able to make strong assumptions about the underlying DGP. Author Contributions Peter Knaus and Daniel Winkler contributed to the conceptualization of the study and the development of the methodology, including the statistical model, shrinkage prior setup, and MCMC estimation procedure. Both Peter Knaus and Daniel Winkler implemented the model, developed the R package shrinkDSM, and performed the data analysis. The simulation study was carried out by Peter Knaus. Daniel Winkler curated the clinical dataset. Peter Knaus and Daniel Winkler jointly drafted and edited the manuscript. Sebastian F. Schoppmann and Gerd Jomrich provided the clinical dataset and contributed the clinical background section. All authors reviewed and approved the final manuscript. Funding The authors have nothing to report. Conflicts of Interest The authors declare no conflicts of interest. Acknowledgments The authors thank Helga Wagner and Sylvia Frühwirth‐Schnatter for their valuable comments, suggestions, and insightful discussions. Open Access funding provided by Wirtschaftsuniversitat Wien/KEMÖ. Data Availability Statement The data used in this study are not publicly available due to privacy and confidentiality concerns involving patient‐level information. References 1 D. Cox , “ Regression Models and Life‐Tables ,” Journal of the Royal Statistical Society. Series B, Statistical Methodology 34 , no. 2 ( 1972 ): 187 – 202 . 2 E. Kaplan and P. Meier , “ Nonparametric Estimation From Incomplete Observations ,” Journal of the American Statistical Association 53 , no. 282 ( 1958 ): 457 – 481 . 3 R. Tibshirani , “ The Lasso Method for Variable Selection in the Cox Model ,” Statistics in Medicine 16 , no. 4 ( 1997 ): 385 – 395 . 9044528 10.1002/(sici)1097-0258(19970228)16:4&lt;385::aid-sim380&gt;3.0.co;2-3 4 J. Fan and R. Li , “ Variable Selection for Cox's Proportional Hazards Model and Frailty Model ,” Annals of Statistics 30 , no. 1 ( 2002 ): 74 – 99 . 5 Y. Wu , “ Elastic Net for Cox s Proportional Hazards Model With a Solution Path Algorithm ,” Statistica Sinica 22 , no. 1 ( 2012 ): 27 . 23226932 10.5705/ss.2010.107 PMC3515861 6 D. Faraggi and R. Simon , “ Bayesian Variable Selection Method for Censored Survival Data ,” Biometrics 54 , no. 4 ( 1998 ): 1475 – 1485 . 9883546 7 N. Sha , M. G. Tadesse , and M. Vannucci , “ Bayesian Variable Selection for the Analysis of Microarray Data With Censored Outcomes ,” Bioinformatics 22 , no. 18 ( 2006 ): 2262 – 2268 . 16845144 10.1093/bioinformatics/btl362 8 P. J. Newcombe , H. Raza Ali , F. M. Blows , et al., “ Weibull Regression With Bayesian Variable Selection to Identify Prognostic Tumour Markers of Breast Cancer Survival ,” Statistical Methods in Medical Research 26 , no. 1 ( 2017 ): 414 – 436 . 25193065 10.1177/0962280214548748 PMC6055985 9 O. Aalen , “ A Model for Nonparametric Regression Analysis of Counting Processes ,” in Mathematical Statistics and Probability Theory: Proceedings, Sixth International Conference, Wisła (Poland), 1978 ( Springer , 1980 ), 1 – 25 . 10 D. Gamerman , “ Dynamic Bayesian Models for Survival Data ,” Journal of the Royal Statistical Society. Series C, Applied Statistics 40 , no. 1 ( 1991 ): 63 – 79 . 11 H. Wagner , “ Bayesian Estimation and Stochastic Model Specification Search for Dynamic Survival Models ,” Statistics and Computing 21 , no. 2 ( 2011 ): 231 – 246 . 12 R. J. Gray , “ Flexible Methods for Analyzing Survival Data Using Splines, With Applications to Breast Cancer Prognosis ,” Journal of the American Statistical Association 87 , no. 420 ( 1992 ): 942 – 951 . 13 A. Perperoglou , “ Cox Models With Dynamic Ridge Penalties on Time‐Varying Effects of the Covariates ,” Statistics in Medicine 33 , no. 1 ( 2014 ): 170 – 180 . 23913655 10.1002/sim.5921 14 J. Yan and J. Huang , “ Model Selection for Cox Models With Time‐Varying Coefficients ,” Biometrics 68 , no. 2 ( 2012 ): 419 – 428 . 22506825 10.1111/j.1541-0420.2011.01692.x PMC3384767 15 K. Hemming and E. Shaw , “ A Parametric Dynamic Survival Model Applied to Breast Cancer Survival Times ,” Journal of the Royal Statistical Society. Series C, Applied Statistics 51 , no. 4 ( 2002 ): 421 – 435 . 16 M. A. Belmonte , G. Koop , and D. Korobilis , “ Hierarchical Shrinkage in Time‐Varying Parameter Models ,” Journal of Forecasting 33 , no. 1 ( 2014 ): 80 – 94 . 17 A. Bitto and S. Frühwirth‐Schnatter , “ Achieving Shrinkage in a Time‐Varying Parameter Model Framework ,” Journal of Econometrics 210 , no. 1 ( 2019 ): 75 – 97 . 18 A. Cadonna , S. Frühwirth‐Schnatter , and P. Knaus , “ Triple the Gamma A Unifying Shrinkage Prior for Variance and Variable Selection in Sparse State Space and TVP Models ,” Econometrics 8 , no. 2 ( 2020 ): 20 . 19 N. G. Polson and J. G. Scott , “ Shrink Globally, Act Locally: Sparse Bayesian Regularization and Prediction ,” in Bayesian Statistics 9 ( Oxford University Press , 2011 ). 20 T. Park and G. Casella , “ The Bayesian Lasso ,” Journal of the American Statistical Association 103 , no. 482 ( 2008 ): 681 – 686 . 21 P. J. Brown and J. E. Griffin , “ Inference With Normal‐Gamma Prior Distributions in Regression Problems ,” Bayesian Analysis 5 , no. 1 ( 2010 ): 171 – 188 . 22 C. M. Carvalho , N. G. Polson , and J. G. Scott , “ Handling Sparsity via the Horseshoe ,” in Artificial Intelligence and Statistics ( PMLR , 2009 ), 73 – 80 . 23 S. Frühwirth‐Schnatter and H. Wagner , “ Stochastic Model Specification Search for Gaussian and Partial Non‐Gaussian State Space Models ,” Journal of Econometrics 154 , no. 1 ( 2010 ): 85 – 100 . 24 J. Griffin and P. Brown , “ Hierarchical Shrinkage Priors for Regression Models ,” Bayesian Analysis 12 , no. 1 ( 2017 ): 135 – 159 . 25 S. Frühwirth‐Schnatter , “ Data Augmentation and Dynamic Linear Models ,” Journal of Time Series Analysis 15, no. 2 ( 1994 ): 183 – 202 . 26 C. K. Carter and R. Kohn , “ On Gibbs Sampling for State Space Models ,” Biometrika 81, no. 3 ( 1994 ): 541 – 553 . 27 W. J. McCausland , S. Miller , and D. Pelletier , “ Simulation Smoothing for State–Space Models: A Computational Efficiency Analysis ,” Computational Statistics &amp; Data Analysis 55 , no. 1 ( 2011 ): 199 – 212 . 28 S. Frühwirth‐Schnatter and R. Frühwirth , “ Auxiliary Mixture Sampling With Applications to Logistic Models ,” Computational Statistics &amp; Data Analysis 51 , no. 7 ( 2007 ): 3509 – 3528 . 29 P. Hougaard , “ Shared Frailty Models ,” in Analysis of Multivariate Survival Data ( Springer , 2000 ), 215 – 262 . 30 P. Hougaard , “ Frailty Models for Survival Data ,” Lifetime Data Analysis 1 , no. 3 ( 1995 ): 255 – 273 . 9385105 10.1007/BF00985760 31 T. A. Balan and H. Putter , “ A Tutorial on Frailty Models ,” Statistical Methods in Medical Research 29 , no. 11 ( 2020 ): 3424 – 3454 . 32466712 10.1177/0962280220921889 PMC7534210 32 S. Frühwirth‐Schnatter , D. Hosszejni , and H. F. Lopes , “ Sparse Bayesian Factor Analysis When the Number of Factors Is Unknown ,” Bayesian Analysis 20 , no. 1 ( 2024 ): 1 – 44 . 33 H. F. Lopes and M. West , “ Bayesian Model Assessment in Factor Analysis ,” Statistica Sinica 14 , no. 1 ( 2004 ): 41 – 67 . 34 G. Kastner , “ Dealing With Stochastic Volatility in Time Series Using the R Package Stochvol ,” Journal of Statistical Software 69 , no. 5 ( 2016 ): 1 – 30 , 10.18637/jss.v069.i05 . 35 G. Kastner , “ Sparse Bayesian Time‐Varying Covariance Estimation in Many Dimensions ,” Journal of Econometrics 210 , no. 1 ( 2019 ): 98 – 115 . 36 D. Winkler and P. Knaus , “ shrinkDSM: Efficient Bayesian Inference for Dynamic Survival Models With Shrinkage. Comprehensive R Archive Network (CRAN) ,” 2022 R Package Version 0.2.0. 37 P. Knaus , A. Bitto‐Nemling , A. Cadonna , and S. Frühwirth‐Schnatter , “ Shrinkage in the Time‐Varying Parameter Model Framework Using the R Package shrinkTVP ,” Journal of Statistical Software 100 , no. 13 ( 2021 ): 1 – 32 . 38 D. Eddelbuettel and R. François , “ RCPP: Seamless R and C++ Integration ,” Journal of Statistical Software 40 , no. 8 ( 2011 ): 1 – 18 , 10.18637/jss.v040.i08 . 39 M. Plummer , N. Best , K. Cowles , and K. Vines , “ CODA: Convergence Diagnosis and Output Analysis for MCMC ,” R News 6 , no. 1 ( 2006 ): 7 – 11 . 40 W. Wang , M. H. Chen , X. Wang , and J. Yan , “ Dynsurv: Dynamic Models for Survival Data. Comprehensive R Archive Network (CRAN) ,” 2024 R Package Version 0.4–7. 41 T. H. Scheike and M. J. Zhang , “ Analyzing Competing Risk Data Using the R Timereg Package ,” Journal of Statistical Software 38 , no. 2 ( 2011 ): 1 – 15 , 10.18637/jss.v038.i02 . PMC3375021 22707920 42 X. R. Liu , Y. Pawitan , and M. Clements , “ Parametric and Penalized Generalized Survival Models ,” Statistical Methods in Medical Research 27 , no. 5 ( 2018 ): 1531 – 1546 , 10.1177/0962280216664760 . 27587596 43 A. S. Mahani and M. T. Sharabiani , “ BSGW: Bayesian Survival Model With Lasso Shrinkage Using Generalized Weibull Regression. Comprehensive R Archive Network (CRAN) ,” 2022 R Package Version 0.9.4. 44 T. M. Therneau , “ A Package for Survival Analysis in R. Comprehensive R Archive Network (CRAN) ,” 2024 R Package Version 3.7–0. 45 P. Frumento , “ PCH: Piecewise Constant Hazard Models for Censored and Truncated Data. Comprehensive R Archive Network (CRAN) ,” 2024 R Package Version 2.1. 46 M. N. Wright and A. Ziegler , “ Ranger: A Fast Implementation of Random Forests for High Dimensional Data in C++ and R ,” Journal of Statistical Software 77 , no. 1 ( 2017 ): 1 – 17 , 10.18637/jss.v077.i01 . 47 J. Friedman , R. Tibshirani , and T. Hastie , “ Regularization Paths for Generalized Linear Models via Coordinate Descent ,” Journal of Statistical Software 33 , no. 1 ( 2010 ): 1 – 22 , 10.18637/jss.v033.i01 . 20808728 PMC2929880 48 N. Simon , J. Friedman , R. Tibshirani , and T. Hastie , “ Regularization Paths for Cox's Proportional Hazards Model via Coordinate Descent ,” Journal of Statistical Software 39 , no. 5 ( 2011 ): 1 – 13 , 10.18637/jss.v039.i05 . PMC4824408 27065756 49 F. Bray , J. Ferlay , I. Soerjomataram , R. L. Siegel , L. A. Torre , and A. Jemal , “ Global Cancer Statistics 2018: GLOBOCAN Estimates of Incidence and Mortality Worldwide for 36 Cancers in 185 Countries ,” CA: a Cancer Journal for Clinicians 68 , no. 6 ( 2018 ): 394 – 424 . 30207593 10.3322/caac.21492 50 A. Behrens , C. Ell , and F. Lordick , “ Perioperative and Palliative Chemotherapy for Esophageal Cancer ,” Visceral Medicine 31 , no. 5 ( 2015 ): 341 – 346 . 10.1159/000438470 PMC4789901 26989390 51 D. Hanahan and R. A. Weinberg , “ Hallmarks of Cancer: The Next Generation ,” Cell 144 , no. 5 ( 2011 ): 646 – 674 . 21376230 10.1016/j.cell.2011.02.013 52 M. H. Aziz , K. Sideras , N. A. Aziz , et al., “ The Systemic‐Immune‐Inflammation Index Independently Predicts Survival and Recurrence in Resectable Pancreatic Cancer and Its Prognostic Value Depends on Bilirubin Levels: A Retrospective Multicenter Cohort Study ,” Annals of Surgery 270 , no. 1 ( 2019 ): 139 – 146 . 29334554 10.1097/SLA.0000000000002660 53 X. Hong , B. Cui , M. Wang , Z. Yang , L. Wang , and Q. Xu , “ Systemic Immune‐Inflammation Index, Based on Platelet Counts and Neutrophil‐Lymphocyte Ratio, Is Useful for Predicting Prognosis in Small Cell Lung Cancer ,” Tohoku Journal of Experimental Medicine 236 , no. 4 ( 2015 ): 297 – 304 . 26250537 10.1620/tjem.236.297 54 B. Hu , X. R. Yang , Y. Xu , et al., “ Systemic Immune‐Inflammation Index Predicts Prognosis of Patients After Curative Resection for Hepatocellular Carcinoma ,” Clinical Cancer Research 20 , no. 23 ( 2014 ): 6212 – 6222 . 25271081 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-14-0442 55 M. Kalli and J. E. Griffin , “ Time‐Varying Sparsity in Dynamic Regression Models ,” Journal of Econometrics 178 , no. 2 ( 2014 ): 779 – 793 . 56 D. R. Kowal , D. S. Matteson , and D. Ruppert , “ Dynamic Shrinkage Processes ,” Journal of the Royal Statistical Society. Series B, Statistical Methodology 81 , no. 4 ( 2019 ): 781 – 804 . 57 P. Knaus and S. Frühwirth‐Schnatter , “The Dynamic Triple Gamma Prior as a Shrinkage Process Prior for Time‐Varying Parameter Models,” 2023 .arXiv Preprint arXiv:2312.10487. 58 R. Okano , Y. Hamura , K. Irie , and S. Sugasawa , “ Locally Adaptive Bayesian Isotonic Regression Using Half Shrinkage Priors ,” Scandinavian Journal of Statistics 51 , no. 1 ( 2024 ): 109 – 141 . 59 D. Hosszejni and G. Kastner , “ Modeling Univariate and Multivariate Stochastic Volatility in R With Stochvol and Factorstochvol ,” Journal of Statistical Software 100, no. 12 ( 2021 ): 1 – 34 . Appendix A MCMC Algorithm Draws from the posterior distribution are obtained through an MCMC Gibbs sampler with MH steps. The MCMC scheme extends those developed in [ 11 , 17 , 18 ] and [ 37 ]. The core idea behind the sampler is to use the data augmentation scheme described in Section 2.3.1 to transform the model into a conditionally Gaussian state space model and then use the many available tools for this class of models to sample from the posterior distribution. For sampling from the conditionally Gaussian state space model, three things are important to note: First, to improve mixing, the sampler uses both the parameterization in ( 8 ), as well as the non‐centered parameterization of Frühwirth‐Schnatter and Wagner [ 23 ]: (A1) x j = Z j β + Z j Q ( θ ) 1 / 2 β ˜ j + ε j , ε j ∼ N 0 , V j , β ˜ j = β ˜ j − 1 + w j , w j ∼ N ( 0 , I ) , where Q ( θ ) 1 / 2 = diag ( θ 1 , … , θ K ) . β j and β ˜ j are linked through the simple transformation β j = β + Q ( θ ) 1 / 2 β ˜ j . This transformation implies the following prior on θ k : θ k | τ θ , λ k θ ∼ N 0 , λ k θ τ θ , λ k θ ∼ F ( 2 a θ , 2 c θ ) , τ θ ∼ F ( 2 c θ , 2 a θ ) . Second, the sampler uses different representations of the triple gamma, normal‐gamma‐gamma and F prior, as this facilitates Gibbs computations [ 18 ]. The representations for the triple gamma and normal‐gamma‐gamma prior are as follows: (A2) β k | ξ k β , κ k β , τ ˜ β , a β , c β ∼ 𝒩 0 , 2 c β ξ k β τ ˜ β a β κ k β ξ k β | a β ∼ 𝒢 a β , 1 , κ k β | c β ∼ 𝒢 c β , 1 , θ k | ξ k θ , κ k θ , τ ˜ θ , a θ , c θ ∼ 𝒢 1 2 , τ ˜ θ a θ κ k θ 4 c θ ξ k θ ξ k θ | a θ ∼ 𝒢 a θ , 1 κ k θ | c θ ∼ 𝒢 c θ , 1 . For notational simplicity, we define ϕ k β = 2 c β κ k β τ ˜ β a β ξ k β , ϕ k θ = 2 c θ κ k θ τ ˜ θ a θ ξ k θ . The expanded representation of the F prior, for both τ ˜ β and τ ˜ θ , is given by (A3) τ ˜ β | a β , d 2 β ∼ 𝒢 a β , d 2 β , d 2 β | a β , c β ∼ 𝒢 c β , 2 c β a β . τ ˜ θ | a θ , d 2 θ ∼ 𝒢 a θ , d 2 θ , d 2 θ | a θ , c θ ∼ 𝒢 c θ , 2 c θ a θ . Note that, in this representation, τ ˜ β and τ ˜ θ marginally follows a scaled version of the prior on τ β and τ θ : (A4) 2 τ ˜ β ∼ F ( 2 c β , 2 a β ) , 2 τ ˜ θ ∼ F ( 2 c θ , 2 a θ ) . Despite this, the representation of the prior structure in ( A2 ) and ( A3 ) is equivalent to the representation in ( 6 ) and ( 7 ), however it allows for easier derivation of closed‐form expressions for the full conditionals. Third, to improve mixing for the sampling of the parameters a β , a θ , c β , and c θ , we use partially marginalized representations of the triple gamma prior for the Metropolis‐within‐Gibbs steps [ 18 ]. When marginalizing over κ k β and κ k θ , this results in (A5) β k | ξ k β , a β , c β , τ ˜ β ∼ t 2 c β 0 , 2 ξ k β a β τ ˜ β , ξ k β | a β ∼ 𝒢 a β , 1 , θ k | ξ k θ , a θ , c θ , τ ˜ θ ∼ t 2 c θ 0 , 2 ξ k θ a θ τ ˜ θ , ξ k θ | a θ ∼ 𝒢 a θ , 1 . When marginalizing over ξ k β and ξ k θ the density of β k and θ k is available in closed, albeit not well‐known form. More specifically: (A6) p ( β k | κ k β , a β , c β , τ ˜ β ) = τ ˜ β κ k β a β c β a β + 1 / 2 Γ ( a β ) π 2 a β − 1 / 2 | β k | a β − 1 / 2 (A7) × K a β − 1 / 2 τ ˜ β κ k β a β c β | β k | , where K ν ( z ) is the modified Bessel function of the second kind. The density of θ k is analogous. Given these details, it is now possible to summarize the MCMC algorithm in Algorithm 1 , 1 , 1 . ALGORITHM 1 MCMC inference for normal dynamic survival models under triple gamma shrinkage prior [ 59 ]. ALGORITHM 1 (Continued). ALGORITHM 1 (Continued). ALGORITHM 2 MCMC inference for normal dynamic survival models with shrinkage and a factor. ALGORITHM 2 (Continued). Additional MCMC steps for the factor component Full conditional posterior of ϕ m Let ϕ m be the largest of ϕ 1 , … ϕ G in absolute value and define the following quantities: ϕ g ∗ = ϕ g ϕ m , f j ∗ = f j ϕ m . This implies the following working priors: ϕ m 2 ∼ G 1 2 , 1 2 σ ϕ m 2 , f j * ∼ N ( 0 , exp ( h j ) ϕ m 2 ) , ϕ g * ∼ N 0 , σ ϕ g 2 ϕ m 2 , which, in turn, leads to the following full conditional posterior for ϕ m 2 : (A8) p ( ϕ m 2 | ϕ g ∗ , h 1 , … , h J , f 1 ∗ , … , f J ∗ ) ∝ ∏ g : g ≠ m p ( ϕ g ∗ | ϕ m 2 ) ∏ j = 1 J p ( f j ∗ | ϕ m 2 ) p ( ϕ m 2 ) ∝ ∏ g : g ≠ m ( ϕ m 2 ) 1 2 e x p − 1 2 ϕ g ∗ 2 σ ϕ g 2 ϕ m 2 × ∏ j = 1 J ( ϕ m 2 ) − 1 2 e x p − 1 2 f j ∗ 2 exp ( h j ) 1 ϕ m 2 × ( ϕ m 2 ) 1 2 − 1 e x p − ϕ m 2 1 2 σ ϕ m 2 = ( ϕ m 2 ) G − J 2 − 1 e x p − 1 2 ϕ m 2 1 σ ϕ m 2 + ∑ g : g ≠ m ϕ g ∗ 2 σ ϕ g 2 + 1 ϕ m 2 ∑ j = 1 J f j ∗ 2 exp ( h j ) , which is the kernel of a G I G G − J 2 , 1 σ m 2 + ∑ g : g ≠ m ϕ g ∗ 2 σ g 2 , ∑ j = 1 J f j ∗ 2 exp ( h j ) distribution.