pmc ACS Nano ACS Nano 822 acssd nn ACS Nano 1936-0851 1936-086X www.acsnano.org pmc-is-collection-domain yes pmc-collection-title ACS AuthorChoice PMC13192315 PMC13192315.1 13192315 13192315 42080366 10.1021/acsnano.5c22213 1 Article Endolysosomal Impact of Elevated Ceramide Levels Revealed by Optical and Ultrastructural Nanoprobing 6108279 Feng Yiqing 7216970 Gärber Florian 7216971 Saied Essa M. 8029862 Singh Harshita 1383882 https://orcid.org/0000-0001-7480-0404 Spedalieri Cecilia 6190474 Werner Stephan 7216967 https://orcid.org/0000-0003-4315-4854 Pratsch Christoph 7216966 Arenz Christoph 7216968 Seifert Stephan 139053 https://orcid.org/0000-0001-8542-6331 Kneipp Janina † Department of Chemistry , 9373 Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin , Brook-Taylor-Str. 2 , 12489 Berlin , Germany ‡ Einstein Center of Catalysis (EC2/BIG-NSE) , 14915 Technische Universität Berlin , Marchstr. 6-8 , 10587 Berlin , Germany § Hamburg School of Food Science, Department of Chemistry , Universität Hamburg , Grindelallee 117 , 20146 Hamburg , Germany ∥ Department X-ray Microscopy , 28340 Helmholtz-Zentrum Berlin für Materialien und Energie GmbH , Albert-Einstein-Str. 15 , 12489 Berlin , Germany * Email: janina.kneipp@chemie.hu-berlin.de . 04 5 2026 19 5 2026 20 19 514062 14071 14087 19 12 2025 01 4 2026 31 3 2026 04 5 2026 04 05 2026 22 05 2026 22 05 2026 © 2026 The Authors. Published by American Chemical Society 2026 The Authors https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/ This article is licensed under CC-BY 4.0 Ceramide is a central bioactive lipid that acts as both a membrane structural component and a crucial signaling molecule in the cells. In order to maintain cellular homeostasis, ceramide metabolism is tightly regulated by enzymes in the endolysosomal system such as acid ceramidase (AC) and acid sphingomyelinase (ASM). We investigate the biochemical consequence of ceramide accumulation within the endolysosomes of living animal cells by optical nanoprobing, using surface-enhanced Raman scattering (SERS) with gold nanoparticles. The ceramide level in 3T3 fibroblast cells was systematically increased by interfering with two key enzymatic pathways in sphingolipid metabolism as well as by adding exogenous ceramide. The modulation of enzyme activity occurred by the inhibition of AC using the inhibitor N-[(2 S ,3 R )-1,3-dihydroxyoctadecan-2-yl]­2-chloroacetamide (SACLAC) in different incubation schemes and supplementation of the cells with additional ASM, respectively, both were added through the culture medium. The analysis of SERS data from the endolysosomal compartment reveals changes in the structure and interaction of proteins alongside variations in membrane composition and organization that correspond to ceramide stress. Combined cryo soft-X-ray nanotomography data of the intact cells show that the biomolecular alterations transform the cellular ultrastructure to varying degrees depending on the specific route and extent of ceramide increase. The ultrastructural changes include severe membrane deformation and changed vesicular organization as a consequence of a high ceramide content. The results demonstrate the label-free optical monitoring of metabolic processes at the subcellular level, before their complex biochemical background, and refine the description of molecular and nanostructure changes associated with distorted sphingolipid metabolism. ceramide surface-enhanced Raman scattering (SERS) gold nanoparticles random forest surrogate minimal depth (SMD) acid sphingomyelinase (ASM) N-[(2 S ,3 R )-1,3-dihydroxyoctadecan-2-yl]2-chloroacetamide (SACLAC) Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft 10.13039/501100001659 511107129 Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft 10.13039/501100001659 EXC 2008 390540038 UniSysCat Technische Universit?t Berlin 10.13039/501100006764 NA pmc-status-qastatus 0 pmc-status-live yes pmc-status-embargo no pmc-status-released yes pmc-prop-open-access yes pmc-prop-olf no pmc-prop-manuscript no pmc-prop-legally-suppressed no pmc-prop-has-pdf yes pmc-prop-has-supplement yes pmc-prop-pdf-only no pmc-prop-suppress-copyright no pmc-prop-is-real-version no pmc-prop-is-scanned-article no pmc-prop-preprint no pmc-prop-in-epmc yes pmc-license-ref CC BY document-id-old-9 nn5c22213 document-id-new-14 nn5c22213 production-flag-MathML-config-version 3 production-flag-journal-citation-display-style acs-titles production-flag-journal-date-display-style dates-used-rcd-rvd-acc production-flag-si-avail yes document-id-alt-64 44df23b3fc3b79ca1d7cc2ab377a365204755645c3f8e8feb6eca13520e50608 Ceramide is a crucial lipid molecule, as it has functions as both an important structural building block and as a second messenger in animal cells. As a fundamental building block of the cell membranes, ceramide can drastically reorganize membrane structure, change permeability, and facilitate signal transmission through lipid raft formation. − It is also a potent bioactive signaling lipid involved in cellular stress responses, senescence, and apoptosis. At the center of sphingolipid metabolism, ceramide acts as a precursor to synthesize complex sphingolipids, and it is also a product of their catabolism. , The balance of intracellular ceramide, as a core component of sphingolipid homeostasis, must be tightly regulated, so that essential cellular processes are maintained. The intracellular regulation of ceramide involves the coordination of multiple enzymes, including two important lysosomal molecules, acid ceramidase (AC) and acid sphingomyelinase (ASM). , At the optimal pH range between pH4.5 and pH5, AC catabolizes ceramide into sphingosine and free fatty acids, whereas ASM generates ceramide via the hydrolysis of sphingomyelin, , thereby dynamically controlling the balance of ceramide in the lysosomes. When these metabolic pathways are perturbed, for example, through a genetic defect, , environmental stress, or enzymatic inhibition, , the fluctuation of ceramide content in the lysosomes can lead to a series of significant downstream influences. Excess ceramide has been shown to impact organelle membrane properties, , as well as to interfere with key signaling pathways. Especially in the lysosomes, where essential cellular catabolism and metabolic processes are regulated, ceramide accumulation impairs the membrane integrity and induces dysfunction of the whole organelle. These changes can trigger additional pathologies in patients, including lysosomal storage disorders such as Farber disease or Niemann-Pick disease. In this study, we probe the molecular changes under ceramide stress in the endolysosomal system of living 3T3 fibroblast cells in a label-free way. Vibrational nanospectroscopy identifies the local composition, biomolecular structure, and molecule–molecule interactions from all types of molecules, and in volumes that correspond to subcellular environments, and exhibits strong potential to capture mild molecular changes in living cells. − By using gold nanoparticles as probes, surface-enhanced Raman scattering (SERS) has shown a high sensitivity for a close observation of biomolecular interaction and dynamics in the endolysosomal compartment under distinct physiological conditions. − While Raman microspectra are typically collected from diffraction-limited focal volumes on the order of tens of femtoliters, the high enhancement and localization of the SERS signals enable the observation of individual SERS-probe containing endolysosomes and the nanoscopic volumes in them. The SERS signals originate in the immediate, few-nanometer vicinity of the nanoprobes. Given the complex biological matrices of cellular models, integration of SERS with efficient machine learning algorithms is crucial to interpret the fingerprint-like vibrational information. Specifically, the Random forest (RF)-based approach of surrogate minimal depth (SMD) has become a powerful tool to investigate the colocalization of molecular groups , , and thereby can reveal subtle biochemical alterations. SMD integrates variable relationships into the selection of important spectral features and enables the analysis of feature relationships based on their mutual impact on the RF model. This approach has already been successfully applied to many different types of data, − including the analysis of relationships across different kinds of analytical data. − Here, we discuss the molecular and ultrastructural effects of elevated intracellular ceramide levels based on endolysosomal probing. Three different, independent pathways were used to increase the amount of ceramide in the cells: (i) the irreversible inhibition of AC by N -[(2 S ,3 R )-1,3-dihydroxyoctadecan-2-yl]­2-chloroacetamide (SACLAC), an alpha-chloroamide ceramide analogue, (ii) supplementation of the cells with additional, external ASM enzyme, and (iii) the addition of exogenous ceramide to the cultured cells. To infer the structure and composition in the endolysosomal environment, we analyze the occurrence of vibrational SERS signals that are selectively originating from this organelle. We demonstrate that SMD can be applied to analyze and compare the colocalization of specific biomolecular components and structures in cells undergoing different control of ceramide content. As will be discussed, the observation of colocalizing spectral features is used to identify distinct patterns of molecular interactions and structure alterations that are characteristic of the type of manipulation of ceramide content, the time point of endosome formation, and ceramide dose. The molecular information from the live cells will be discussed in the context of changes in the cellular ultrastructure, as observed by soft X-ray nanotomography (SXT) of the intact cells. As will be demonstrated, the data facilitate our understanding of subtle subcellular responses to ceramide stress originating from diverse pathways. Results and Discussion Mature Endolysosomes Adapt to Sudden Ceramide Build-Up when AC Is Inhibited In our experiments, we probe the endolysosomal composition by SERS in the situations of (i) inhibited breakdown, (ii) increased synthesis, and (iii) additional, internalized ceramide, respectively. In total, 40,800 spectra were collected from cells under ceramide stress and their controls. Scheme gives an overview of the respective incubation conditions of the cultured cells. The 3T3 fibroblast cells were incubated with the inhibitor SACLAC in two different ways. In the first experiment ( Scheme A), the cells were first incubated with the gold nanoprobes that are taken up into the endolysosomal system and that cause strong SERS signals from the endolysosomal environment. In the next incubation step, the inhibitor SACLAC was added in two concentrations. Thereby, the influence of the enzyme inhibitor, expected to lead to a buildup of ceramide in the pre-existing, matured an endolysosomal environment, is studied ( Scheme A). At the time of probing, all of the SERS probes are contained in lysosomal structures. In a second set of experiments, the incubation sequence was reversed ( Scheme B): an incubation with SACLAC before the gold nanostructures enables SERS probing of endolysosomes that have formed under the influence of higher ceramide levels. 1 Schematic for the Incubation of 3T3 Cells with Gold Nanoparticles, SACLAC, ASM, and Ceramide for SERS Experiments. (A) Cells Were Incubated with SACLAC for 24 h after the Incubation with Gold Nanoparticles for 24 h; (B) Cells Were Seeded in the Culture Medium with SACLAC and Incubated for 24 h Prior to the Incubation of Gold Nanoparticles for 24 h; (C) Cells Were Incubated with 200 nM ASM for 3h after the Incubation with Gold Nanoparticles for 24 h; and (D) Cells Were Incubated with Ceramide for 30 min after the Incubation with Gold Nanoparticles for 24 h The toxicity of SACLAC was assessed by determining cell viability by an XTT cell proliferation assay, applying the inhibitor in seven concentrations ( Figure S2 ). The inhibitor concentration was chosen in such a way that the viability is not drastically decreased, but effects are visible. The SACLAC treatments of the cells at 1 and 10 μM in the culture medium reduced the viability to 91% and 87%, respectively ( Figure S2 ). The SERS spectra of the SACLAC-treated cells together with a statistical analysis of the occurrence of particular signals in the data sets that typically comprise several hundreds of spectra are displayed in Figure . A summary of tentative assignments of the vibrational bands is found in Table S1 . The data reveal the influence of increased ceramide in mature endolysosomes, when incubation occurs according to Scheme A ( Figure A to Figure D) (for data from controls, see Figure S1A–D ). All treated and control groups share a number of spectral features, mostly assigned to proteins (cf. Table S1 ), specifically signals of the amide groups at 1704, 1276, and 1230 cm –1 , , , − of different individual amino acids at 1347, 870, 837, and 755 cm –1 , , , − of a mode assigned to protein backbone C–C/C–N stretching at 1132 cm –1 , , and signals of disulfide groups at 658, 553, and 503 cm –1 . , , , , , A deformation mode of lipid CH 2 /CH 3 groups at 1318 cm –1 , is a common feature in all samples as well. 1 Average SERS spectra (A,C,E,G) and relative band occurrence (B,D,F,H) of the respective SERS data sets of 3T3 cells incubated with (A,B) 1 μM SACLAC and (C,D) 10 μM SACLAC for 24 h after incubation with gold nanoparticles for 24 h (cf. Scheme A) of 3T3 cells incubated with gold nanoparticles for 24 h after seeding in the culture medium with (E,F) 1 μM SACLAC and (G,H) 10 μM SACLAC for 24 h (cf. Scheme B). The data sets contain 366 (A,B), 770 (C,D), 550 (E,F), and 1007 (G,H) SERS spectra, respectively. Excitation wavelength: 785 nm. Excitation intensity: 2.7 × 10 5 W cm –2 . Acquisition time: 1 s. When SACLAC was added to the cells at the lower concentration of 1 μM ( Figure A,B), several spectral features indicate changes in the conformation of proteins in the endolysosomal environment compared to the untreated control cells (cf. Figure S1A,B ). Specifically, the amide II band at 1574 cm –1 , and a stretching mode of disulfide bridges at 465 cm –1 , are not observed, along with increased occurrence of signals from an amide III mode at 1276 cm –1 . , , The altered protein structure and interaction is also evidenced by the increased presence of signals of aromatic protein side chains that are exposed differently, particularly of phenylalanine at 1028 and 1006 cm –1 , , , − and a shift of the tyrosine ring breathing mode from 838 cm –1 to 845 cm –1 , , , , in the SACLAC-treated cells ( Figure A,B). Moreover, new vibrational bands at 1436, 1056, and 779 cm –1 , assigned to lipid CH 2 deformation modes, , acyl chain C–C stretching modes, , , , and phosphatidylinositol, , respectively, are found in the endolysosome spectra of the treated cells. A pronounced signal at 1389 cm –1 assigned to a deformation of CH 3 groups is absent compared to the control samples ( Figure S1A ). Although the very specific SERS signals of pure ceramide are not found here, the changes of the lipid signals suggest a reorganization of membrane composition and structures under the influence of the additional ceramide that are well in-line with structural features observed in previous studies of liposomal membrane models, including ceramide containing liposomes. , It should be noted that the viability of the cells exposed to 1 μM SACLAC is only slightly decreased, as determined from the XTT test ( Figure S2 ). The observed molecular changes suggest that the processes induced by SACLAC at this minimally toxic concentration are part of an adaptation to the accumulation of ceramide. At a higher SACLAC concentration of 10 μM, viability drops to ∼ 87% ( Figure S2 ). There, the endolysosomal environment undergoes more complex changes ( Figure C,D). Specifically, additional signals indicate significant changes in a protein secondary structure, represented, e.g., by the amide II and III bands at 1497 and 1224 cm –1 , , , , respectively, and the presence of an amino acid carboxylate stretching vibration at 1402 cm –1 , that is absent from the spectra of the controls ( Figure S1C,D ). The spectral changes in the signals of lipids are much more pronounced after exposure of the cells to this higher concentration of SACLAC. Specifically, a bending mode of lipid CH 3 groups at 1386 cm –1 , a phosphate group vibration at 1180 cm –1 , , and the frequent occurrence of a cholesterol mode at 426 cm –1 , together with the absent or less frequent signals of different lipid CH 2 deformation modes reveal severe changes of lipid state-of-order and membrane fluidity. The lower cell viability ( Figure S2 ) is in agreement with the higher toxicity of SACLAC at increased concentration that was reported in human acute myeloid leukemia cell lines. Our data indicate that the toxic action must be linked to the drastic structural changes of the lipid membranes observed here. The pronounced changes indicate a dose-dependence of the ability of the fibroblast cells to adjust the molecular environment of mature endolysosomes in response to an accumulation of ceramide when the usual breakdown of the molecule by AC is impaired. Probing of Endolysosome Development and Aging in a Ceramide-Rich Environment In the spectral analysis following incubation according to Scheme B, spectra are collected from endolysosomes that formed when SACLAC had already inhibited AC and altered the acting of the lipid metabolism of the cells ( Figure E–H). In these experiments, the SERS nanoprobes are enclosed in endolysosomes that form and develop in a ceramide-rich environment. The SERS spectra of all cells exhibit several common vibrational bands associated with protein and lipid interactions with the nanoprobes (compare Figures and S1 ), irrespective of an inhibition of AC. They include important signals that are associated with the lipid acyl chains and vibrations of proline, valine, and tryptophan ( Figure , Table S1 ). We assign the occurrence of these spectral features to the different endolysosomal environment, including the processing of the protein corona that reaches different stages in the long continuous incubation period of 24 h. A number of spectral differences between the control and SACLAC-treated cells were found to be independent of SACLAC concentration ( Figure E–H). In cells treated with either 1 or 10 μM SACLAC before the incubation with the nanoprobes, the amide II signals are modified, with a band at 1527 cm –1 in the control samples ( Figure S1E,F ) being replaced by new amide II components at 1555 and 1539 cm –1 , , , , , , ( Figure E–H, Table S1 ). Together with the loss of signals in the amide III band at 1221 cm –1 , associated with β-sheet structures, , and other signals suggesting less and differently stabilized disulfide bridges, they indicate alterations in protein conformation in the endolysosomes upon SACLAC treatment and the induced endolysosomal stress. The changes found with respect to the amino acid side chains as a consequence of protein structural alterations vary in the experiments with the two concentrations of the inhibitor. At a SACLAC concentration of 1 μM, bands of the aromatic amino acids, tyrosine, tryptophan, and phenylalanine occur much less frequently than in the control spectra, and phenylalanine is represented by a CC deformation band at 1596 cm –1 , , in addition to its ring breathing vibrations in the range from 1000 to 1030 cm –1 (compare Figures E with S1E , Table S1 ). Under 10 μM SACLAC treatment, exclusive appearances of tryptophan at 753 and 570 cm –1 , , , indicate an altered microenvironment of tryptophan residues (compare Figures G and S1E ). As a result of the SACLAC-induced increase in ceramide, changes of lipid signals were observed. The frequently occurring band assigned to a CH 2 deformation of lipid chains at 1429 cm –1 , , that is present in the control spectra ( Figure S1E,F ) disappeared in the treated cells, in agreement with the results found when SACLAC acted exclusively on mature endolysosomes discussed above ( Scheme A). In the cells treated with 1 μM SACLAC, signals of the acyl chains occur less frequently ( Figure F) than in the control cells ( Figure S1F ). When cells were exposed to 10 μM SACLAC, even more differences were found. They include the shift of another CH 2 deformation band from 1460 cm –1 to 1445 cm –1 , − ( Figure G), an additional lipid acyl chain C–C stretching band at 1065 cm –1 , , , ( Figure E,G) and also the occurrence of a signal from cholesterol at 439 cm –1 . All these changes indicate that the ceramide enrichment in the endolysosomes affects lipid composition, membrane packing, and fluidity in this compartment. Effects of AC Inhibition Vary for Different Inhibitor Incubation and Probing Time Points Both treatments with the inhibitor SACLAC, prior to or after nanoprobe exposure ( Scheme A,B, respectively), lead to ceramide accumulation in the endolysosomes through AC inhibition. The data of Figure show that the effects on endolysosomal molecular composition and structure at two inhibitor doses, both with only moderately decreasing viability ( Figure S2 ), differ depending on the relative timing of nanoparticle internalization and inhibitor exposure. The effects of the different conditions at which the inhibitor was added to the cell cultures with respect to the control group are visible in the score plots of a principal component (PC) analysis (PCA) ( Figure S3A,C,E,G ). The plots indicate the overall dissimilarity of the data in each condition. The molecular variation with respect to the onset of ceramide increase ( Scheme A vs Scheme B) is represented qualitatively in the PC loadings of a PCA of each data set ( Figure S3B,D,F,H ). The scores of the first two principal components (PC1 and PC2) exhibited an extensive overlap of the data from all SACLAC-treated and control cells, in agreement with the abundance in common spectral features discussed above and their general cell-to-cell variation in both groups ( Figure S3A,C,E,G ). As revealed by a comparison of the loading spectra ( Figure S3B,D with S3F and S3H, respectively), in full agreement with the discussed band occurrence in Figure (cf. Figure B,D with Figure F,H, respectively), the variation in lipid organization exhibited marked differences upon the two probing regimes. As an example, an absence of an influence on CH 2 deformation vibrations under SACLAC treatments following nanoparticles ( Figure S3B,D ) likely reflects an adaptation of membrane structures in the existing more mature endolysosomes (cf. Scheme A). In contrast, an earlier exposure of SACLAC, prior to gold nanoprobe uptake (cf. Scheme B, Figure F,H, loadings in Figure S3F,H ), shows a difference with respect to lipid chain organization by contributions around 1440 cm –1 and supports that the alterations due to ceramide build-up have established before probing. Contributions from cholesterol signals that are different from the controls were observed for both incubation schemes, when the higher SACLAC concentration of 10 μM was administered ( Figure D,H). However, the bands from cholesterol presented at 439 cm –1 ( Figure D) and 426 cm –1 ( Figure H), respectively, indicating a different effect on membrane stability, depending on the situation under which the endolysosome has formed. This is in agreement with the stabilizing function of cholesterol in sphingolipid membranes. Moreover, different effects of SACLAC-induced ceramide enrichment on the conformation of endolysosomal proteins were observed. Adding SACLAC before gold nanoparticles ( Scheme B) displayed more secondary structure modifications, visible, e.g., in altered amide II bands. Differently, spectral differences when SACLAC was added after the nanoprobes ( Scheme A) are mainly associated with backbone vibrations and signals from certain amino acid side chains. It suggests that the alterations of protein structures are more localized, when the matured, more complex endolysosomes (as in the experiments according to Scheme A) must adapt to increased ceramide content. The vibrational distinctions induced by endolysosomal ceramide build-up were found to be dependent on SACLAC dose for both incubation regimes ( Scheme A,B). In the cells treated with 1 μM SACLAC, C–S bands occur ( Figure F,B) less frequently, indicating more stable disulfide bridges in proteins. , In contrast, changes in amino acids and lipids are more evident in the cells with 10 μM SACLAC ( Figure D,H), which implies more complex influences on the endolysosomal environment at this inhibitor concentration. These dose-dependent effects suggest that biophysical changes in endolysosomes are more pronounced with increasing ceramide level. Endolysosomal Adaptation to Ceramide Enrichment by Addition of Acid Sphingomyelinase The ceramide accumulation through the enhanced production of ceramide by the enzyme ASM was investigated by administering additional ASM through the cell culture medium. To ensure optimum activity of ASM throughout the experiment, 3T3 cells were incubated with the enzyme for 3 h after the incubation with the optical nanoprobes for 24 h ( Scheme C). Their SERS data are shown in Figure A,B (control data in Figure C,D). High similarity was observed in the SERS spectra of both ASM-treated cells and control samples ( Figure A,C), in agreement with the substantial overlap of PCA clusters (score plot in Figure S4A ). It is interesting to note that the PC1 loading (upper trace in Figure S4B ) highly resembles those from the SACLAC-exposed cells (upper traces in Figure S3B,D,F,H ), consistent with common, predominant contributions from proteins and lipids to the spectra. Pronounced phenylalanine signals at 1028 cm –1 , − and 1000 cm –1 , , , were found in both ASM-treated and control cells ( Figure A,C). 2 Average SERS spectra (A,C) and relative band occurrence (B,D) of the respective SERS data sets of 3T3 cells incubated with (A,B) 200 nM ASM for 3 h after incubation with gold nanoparticles for 24 h (cf. Scheme C) and (C,D) control samples only incubated with gold nanoparticles for 24 h. The data sets contain 1050 (A,B) and 1251 (C,D) SERS spectra, respectively. Excitation wavelength: 785 nm. Excitation intensity: 2.7 × 10 5 W cm –2 . Acquisition time: 1 s. Compared to the spectra from the control cells ( Figure C,D), amide II signals at 1500, 1548, and 1585 cm –1 , , , , which appeared at higher vibrational frequencies, presented less often in the cells exposed to additional ASM ( Figure A,B). These marked changes of protein secondary structure, induced by increased ceramide, are also evidenced by signals from amino acids that indicate different burial of side chain residues in control and ASM-treated cells (compare Figure A with C, Table S1 ). , , − , , The data indicate important changes of lipid composition and structure in the cells exposed to additional ASM, specifically the absence of a cholesterol signal at 433 cm –1 and new signals of phosphatidylinositol vibrations at 783 cm –1 and 595 cm –1 , ( Figure A,B). These changes of the composition of the membranes, , , are accompanied by more dramatic membrane reconstructions, indicated, e.g., by fewer signals of the lipid intrachain C–C stretching vibration at 1059 cm –1 , , , ( Figure B) and a shift of the lipid CH 2 deformation vibration from 1432 cm –1 , ( Figure C) to 1477 cm –1 ( Figure A). Both vibrations point to alterations of membrane packing and state-of-order under the ASM treatment. Although the major spectral variation appears similar when ceramide accumulation is induced by different pathways, i.e., by inhibition of AC or addition of ASM (cf. loadings in Figures S3 and S4 , respectively), several of the changes are very distinct and characteristic of the addition of ASM. Especially, the observed drastic alteration of lipid organization is probably due to the rapid increase in ceramide content in the membranes. , A 2-fold increase in total ceramide within 30 min was reported in human mammary carcinoma cells upon activation of the ASM/ceramide pathway by exposure to cisplatin. In contrast, inhibition of AC by SACLAC was shown to induce ceramide accumulation in a more progressing fashion. The results observed here indicate a reduced stability of the membranes, evidenced, e.g., by the disappearing signal of cholesterol, and are in agreement with the drastic changes to lipid composition found in other cell types. , , Although some of the alterations to protein structure show similarities to effects of AC inhibition by SACLAC, the specific absence of tyrosine and tryptophan signals when ceramide content increases as a consequence of additional ASM implies that distinct microenvironments of aromatic residues are influenced when this metabolic pathway is affected. While both SACLAC and ASM are known to enrich ceramide, they have different effects on protein and lipid structure and composition in the endolysosomal environment, especially remarkably different impacts of ceramide excess on the membranes. RF Analyses Reveal Changes in Molecular Interactions upon Inhibition of AC The supervised approach of RF was applied to assess if the spectra from SACLAC-treated cells can be differentiated from those of control samples. The RF models achieved classification accuracies higher than 80% for both training and test data sets ( Table S2 ), indicating that distinguishable molecular patterns exist between treated cells and control samples, despite several similarities. SMD was applied to select the spectral features that contribute to differentiation ( Figure S5 ), and the SMD relation parameter mean adjusted agreement (MAA) was calculated between the selected, important bands and all other spectral variables to analyze the co-occurrence of spectral features, as indicators of molecular colocalization and interaction ( Figure ). By the application of RF-SMD analysis, several differences between the treated and control cells become obvious that are not observed in the band occurrence analysis shown in Figures and . 3 Spectral variables across the spectral range that co-occur with the important bands (left) selected by SMD analysis (cf. Figure S5 ) of SERS spectra from 3T3 cells treated with (A) 1 μM SACLAC and (B) 10 μM SACLAC for 24 h after incubation with gold nanoparticles for 24 h (cf. Scheme A), with (C) 1 μM SACLAC and (D–F) 10 μM SACLAC for 24 h prior to 24 h incubation of gold nanoparticles (cf. Scheme B), and with (G) 200 nM ASM for 3 h after incubation with gold nanoparticles for 24 h (cf. Scheme C). The striped rows in (D) correspond to two broad SMD features in Figure S5D , and their details are illustrated (E) between 1344 and 1380 cm –1 and (F) between 592 and 630 cm –1 . The data sets contain 366 (A), 770 (B), 550 (C), 1007 (D–F), and 1050 (G) SERS spectra, respectively, after elimination of spectra with no signal after the experiment. Bands assigned to proteins, lipids, and DNA are marked in blue, yellow, and red, respectively. SMD values are shown in Figure S5 . As the analysis of the 1 μM SACLAC treatment-after-nanoprobe incubation shows ( Figure A), differences due to cholesterol are already found at low SACLAC concentration, and its bands at 702, 446, and 428 cm –1 ( Figure A, yellow blocks in the map) , , were highly associated with protein signals at 1163, 1022, 690, 524, and 504 cm –1 ( Figure A, blue important bands on the left). , , − , − , The complex network of related signals, particularly from lipids at 1315 cm –1 , , cholesterol at 428 cm –1 , amino acids at 1022 cm –1 , − and 852 cm –1 , and the protein C–C/C–N bond vibration at 1129 cm –1 ( Figure A, blue and yellow blocks in the map) co-occurred with disulfide vibrations at 524 cm –1 , and 504 cm –1 ( Figure A, important bands in blue). , , , , The known sensitivity of several of the discussed protein signals to changes in protein secondary structure indicates that the protein conformation near cholesterol-rich domains is changed when the ceramide level increases. It is likely that membrane reorganization, mediated by ceramide enrichment, alters protein stability. When the concentration of SACLAC in the experiments was increased to 10 μM ( Figure B), further important indicators of the protein structure and stability become visible. The disulfide stretching vibration at 509 cm –1 , , , , exhibits a different network of co-occurring signals, , including components of the amide III region at 1271–1282 cm –1 , , and a shifted protein backbone vibration at 1137 cm –1 ( Figure B, blue blocks in the map). , This implies that distinct protein unfolding occurred as a consequence of AC inhibition. Notably, the tryptophan vibration at 1354 cm –1 ( Figure B, blue important band on the left) , , , shows high relations with the amide III component at 1234 cm –1 , , and several amino acid bands, e.g., at 905 cm –1 , 870 cm –1 , and 647 cm –1 , , ( Figure B, blue blocks in the map), while a tryptophan signal at 1348 cm –1 ( Figure B, blue important band on the left) co-occurs with the ring breathing mode of the molecule at 769 cm –1 , ( Figure B, blue block in the map), indicating distinct populations of tryptophan residues with different physicochemical environments that underpin the changes in protein structure. In endolysosomes that are formed during the ongoing inhibition of the AC enzyme ( Scheme B), co-occurrence of a signal of phosphatidylinositol at 597 cm –1 ( Figure C, yellow block in the map) with the protein backbone vibration at 1137 cm –1 , ( Figure C, blue important band on the left) is found for low inhibitor concentration. This is consistent with the known ability of phosphoinositide to recruit effector proteins at endolysosomal membranes. A strong association of the phenylalanine vibration at 1609 cm –1 , , and a deformation at 1388 cm –1 assigned to lipid tails , ( Figure C, blue and yellow important bands on the left) indicates a different exposure of phenylalanine protein side chains near lipid membranes in the cells with high ceramide content compared to the control samples. These changes are further underpinned by lipid signals that indicate an increased disorder of lipids, specifically a band at 1115 cm –1 ( Figure C, yellow block in the map), assigned to lipid intrachain gauche conformers, , , and its close relation to the methylene deformation at 1441 cm –1 , − , ( Figure C, yellow important band on the left). The other CH 2 deformation mode at 1428 cm –1 , , ( Figure C, yellow block in the map), which is found often in the control samples ( Figure S1F ), is highly related to the lipid CH 2 /CH 3 deformation vibration at 1311 cm –1 , and a protein backbone mode at 1140 cm –1 , ( Figure C, yellow and blue important bands on the left). This indicates that specific alterations in the backbone geometry of proteins lead to interactions with localized, distinctly organized membranes, when endolysosomes form at elevated ceramide level. The endolysosomal remodeling patterns that are observed when treatment occurs with the higher inhibitor concentration of 10 μM ( Scheme B and Figure D) differ from those observed under any of the other conditions. It leads to a co-occurrence of amide I components at 1707 cm –1 and 1646 cm –1 ( Figure D, blue important band on the left) along with a tryptophan/tyrosine signal at 1616 cm –1 , suggesting an altered conformation of proteins that are rich in hydrophobic residues. In agreement with this, different signals that can be associated with changes in the environments of disulfide bridges at 464 cm –1 , and 509 cm –1 , , , , ( Figure D, blue important bands on the left) are found as well. The amide III band at 1271 cm –1 , , and the C–S band at 658 cm –1 , , , co-occur, further pointing to distinct interactions among proteins that underwent conformational changes. Interestingly, correlation of the bands at 1102 cm –1 , and 1439 cm –1 , − is found, similar to the situation of lower inhibitor dose (compare Figures D with C). A key hallmark when AC inhibition is induced at the higher SACLAC concentration ( Figure B,D) is the distinct signal of adenine at 725 cm –1 and 730 cm –1 , , respectively ( Figure C,D, red blocks in the maps). It co-occurs with an amide II component at 1500 cm –1 and with the phospholipid C–C stretching mode at 1102 cm –1 , in the preformed endolysosomes ( Scheme A, Figure C). In the RF analysis of the SACLAC-first experiments ( Scheme B), it is highly associated with the band of tryptophan at 768 cm –1 , , ( Figure D, blue important band on the left). Although the cellular toxicity that we find for an incubation of the cells with 10 μM SACLAC is only moderate ( Figure S2 ), we ascribe the presence of the adenine features to a changed degradation of nucleic acids in the endolysosomes, indicating a dysfunction of this compartment as a consequence of AC inhibition and concomitant ceramide accumulation. Such effects on endolysosomal function could be mediated by an enhanced lysosomal acidification that has been reported when AC was inhibited by 2-oleoylethanolamine in another cell line. Interactions of Proteins, Nucleic Acids, and Lipids in Endolysosomes Formed at High Inhibitor Concentration as Highlighted by Tryptophan and Cholesterol Modes The effects of an inhibition of AC by SACLAC on the composition and interaction of proteins are revealed by a number of relationships of individual spectral components of the broad SMD peaks centered at 1366 and 617 cm –1 ( Figure S5D ), assigned to vibrations of tryptophan and cholesterol, respectively (depicted as two striped rows in Figure D). Apart from the signal of a lipid terminal CH 3 bending at 1375 cm –1 ( Figure E, yellow important band on the left), the features in the 1344–1380 cm –1 region ( Figure E, blue important bands on the left) are attributed to tryptophan ring vibrations. , , − The higher vibrational frequency of these bands, observed in these cells at 1354 cm –1 and 1348 cm –1 ( Figure B), indicates that the tryptophan side chains must be involved in stronger hydrophobic interactions with surrounding molecules. The co-occurrence of vibrations of amide groups at 1702, 1645, 1587, and 1575 cm –1 , , of the protein backbone at 1140 cm –1 , , amino acid side chains at 1608 and 768 cm –1 , , , , , disulfide bonds at 465 cm –1 , , and the lipid chain at 1120 cm –1 , , ( Figure E, blue and yellow blocks in the map) with the 1366 cm –1 tryptophan band ( Figure E, blue important band on the left) indicates that proteins of different conformation and stability are present at the lipid membrane. In contrast, a signal of tryptophan at 1362 cm –1 ( Figure E, blue important band on the left) is related to a signal of nucleic acids at 810 cm –1 ( Figure E red block in the map), indicating an interaction of proteins and nucleic acids. When the tryptophan signal is shifted to 1345 cm –1 , only a lipid acyl chain vibration at 1120 cm –1 , , and a DNA/RNA band at 825 cm –1 co-occurred ( Figure E), suggesting less hydrophobic interactions of tryptophan residues with nucleic acids next to lipid membranes. Band co-occurrence within the 592–630 cm –1 region exhibits diverse patterns ( Figure F). While an adenine signal at 729 cm –1 , ( Figure F, red blocks in the map) and the tryptophan ring vibration at 773 cm –1 , , ( Figure F, blue blocks in the map) are related to the selected features at 617 and 621 cm –1 ( Figure F, yellow important bands on the left), , , the feature at 617 cm –1 is moreover associated with a lipid CH 2 scissoring mode at 1440 cm –1 , − and a proline vibration at 906 cm –1 , ( Figure F, yellow and blue blocks in the map). This is an indication that proteins and nucleic acids colocalize in specific, distinct membrane regions. Similar protein–nucleic acid interactions, but near cholesterol-rich membranes, are suggested by the related bands of the cholesterol features around 613 cm –1 . For cholesterol band components shifted to lower frequencies, sequential co-occurrence patterns are observed, one at 608 cm –1 with the amide II component at 1575 cm –1 , , one at 606 cm –1 with amide II, a phenylalanine band at 1028 cm –1 , , − a tyrosine vibration at 641 cm –1 , , , and one at 603 cm –1 with phenylalanine and tyrosine bands ( Figure F and Table S1 ). The shift in important frequency that is accompanied by changes in band relations indicates a range of protein orientations on cholesterol domains, from the proximity of the amide backbone to exposure of residue side chains. An inverse change was observed for phosphoinositide vibrations in the 595–599 cm –1 spectral range. With a shift of this mode from 599 cm –1 to 595 cm –1 ( Figure F, blue important band on the left), a co-occurring tyrosine band at 641 cm –1 , , ( Figure F, blue block in the map) is replaced by a phenylalanine band at 1028 cm –1 , − and a signal from protein backbones at 1139 cm –1 , ( Figure F, blue blocks in the map). These relationships are indicative of an altered binding of proteins with phosphoinositides during ceramide enrichment. Distinct Protein–Lipid Interaction Network Is Observed upon ASM Addition The SMD relation analysis also demonstrates differences of the molecular interaction network in response to an increase in ceramide when exogenous ASM was added to the cells ( Scheme C, Figure G). The results show consistent co-occurrence of amide II components at 1572 cm –1 , , 1548 cm –1 , , , , and 1528 cm –1 with the bands assigned to lipid chain deformation at 1319 cm –1 , , , the protein backbone at 1132 cm –1 , , and disulfide bridges at 505 cm –1 , , , , , ( Figure G, yellow and blue blocks in the map). This suggests that also upon ASM-related ceramide increase, conformational changes of membrane proteins contribute to the main biochemical differences. The cholesterol band at 609 cm –1 ( Figure G, yellow important band on the left) co-occurred with the amide II component at 1530 cm –1 and the lipid CH 2 twisting mode at 1302 cm –1 , , , ( Figure G, blue and yellow blocks in the map). This indicates that the changed interactions of membrane proteins due to ceramide build-up occur in the cholesterol-rich domains. Interestingly, the lipid phosphate vibration at 1182 cm –1 , , ( Figure G, yellow important band on the left) is related with the protein amide II and backbone signals at 1516 cm –1 and 1136 cm –1 , , , respectively ( Figure G, blue blocks in the map), implying changes of functional protein-stabilized phospholipid membranes. The interactions revealed in this analysis suggest that membrane-associated proteins may exhibit distinct structural disorder alongside changes in fluidity of the membranes surrounding them and changed dynamics of signaling lipids after ASM delivery, specifically due to the known enrichment in ceramide upon addition of ASM to the cells. Exogenous Ceramide Has Indirect Effects on Endolysosomal Biochemistry The effects of an increased ceramide concentration as a consequence of changes in sphingolipid metabolism were compared to those of exogenous ceramide that we added to the cell culture medium at four different concentrations. The range of ceramide concentration, from 1 to 15 μM, was chosen to enable a common incubation time and probing of large numbers of adhering cells in the absence of compromised appearance for all samples. At ceramide concentrations of 25 μM in the culture medium, cells detached visibly within short periods of time from the surface of the incubation wells (data not shown), in agreement with the dose-dependent decrease in viability described in previous work. , The spectra of the cells incubated according to Scheme D share a number of similarities that are independent of ceramide dose (cf. Figure S6 and discussion of the frequency of occurrence of spectral bands in the Supporting Information ). In line with our prior studies using labeled ceramide, the results indicate that despite its primary localization in the Golgi, ceramide that is taken up from the environment into the cells induces changes in the molecular environment of endolysosomes that are independent of ceramide concentration. Nevertheless, the SERS data from the endolysosomes of cells that took up additional ceramide from the culture medium also display changes with respect to their control group that vary with ceramide dose, as indicated by an RF analysis, achieving an overall accuracy of 84.65% ( Table S3 ). An increasing sensitivity for the separation with increase in ceramide dose is observed ( Table S3 ) and implies that specific molecular structure and interactions represented by respective spectral features become more discriminative at higher ceramide concentrations. They concern particular influences on protein stability as well as changes in the structure, composition, and interaction of lipid membranes and nucleic acids (cf. Figure S6 and corresponding discussion). Accordingly, the important bands selected by SMD (cf. Figure S8 ) are attributed to vibrations of proteins and lipids and exhibit diverse correlations with other selected bands (cf., Figure S4 ). 4 Spectral variables co-occurring with the important bands (left) selected by SMD analysis (cf. Figure S8 ) of SERS spectra from 3T3 cells incubated with ceramide at different concentrations after incubation with gold nanoparticles for 24 h. Bands assigned to proteins are marked in blue and to lipids in yellow. The bands at 1594 cm –1 and 1570 cm –1 assigned to phenylalanine , , and amide II, , respectively, co-occur with each other as well as with the amide I bands at ∼1690 cm –1 ( Figure , blue blocks in the map), suggesting changes of secondary structure and side chain exposure. The bands of amide groups co-occur with a lipid marker at 1420 cm –1 ( Figure , yellow important band on the left). , , Moreover, the relations between a lipid band at 1315 cm –1 , , the amide III component at 1276 cm –1 , , , disulfide bands at 657 cm –1 and 500 cm –1 , , , , , , and the protein backbone vibration at 1131 cm –1 , ( Figure , yellow and blue blocks in the map) indicates coordinated changes of protein structures and the organization of surrounding membranes induced by the exogenous ceramide. The C–S stretching vibration at 689 cm –1 ( Figure , blue important band on the left) co-occurs with the lipid acyl chain stretching at 1061 cm –1 , , , , as well as the proline/valine at vibration at 878 cm –1 ( Figure , yellow and blue blocks in the map). This spatial colocalization of these signals of methionine and proline/valine and bands assigned to hydrophobic membrane regions indicate that the changes induced by supplemented ceramide affect methionine and aliphatic amino acids differently. The tryptophan residue interactions demonstrated distinct microenvironments upon exogenous ceramide treatment, as indicated by the relation of the tryptophan vibration at 1363 cm –1 with reorganized lipids and cysteine residues ( Figure , blue important band on the left), evidenced by co-occurring bands at 1421 cm –1 , , and 638 cm –1 , , , respectively ( Figure , yellow and blue blocks in the map). The ring breathing vibration at 764 cm –1 , , ( Figure , blue important band on the left) is associated with amide I at 1705, 1690, and 1652 cm –1 , , as well as aromatic amino acid vibrations at 1624 and 1605 cm –1 , , ( Figure , blue blocks in the map), suggesting alterations in the local environment of hydrophobic residues accompanied by partial rearrangement of protein secondary structures. Another important tryptophan feature at 568 cm –1 ( Figure , blue important on the left), which is related to a shifted C–S bond at 678 cm –1 ( Figure , blue block in the map), may indicate changes in the spatial arrangement between tryptophan and sulfur-containing amino acids. The results from our SMD analysis demonstrate the tight coordination between protein conformational changes and membrane remodeling processes in the endolysosomes when ceramide is supplemented. These results confirm that exogenous ceramide has indirect effects on membrane proteins and associated membranes in the endolysosomes, despite the known translocation of exogenous ceramide to the Golgi apparatus rather than to lysosomes. The observation is in good agreement with the results of our previous work that showed that fluorophore-labeled ceramide affected the molecular interactions in endolysosomes indirectly. Furthermore, JEG3 trophoblastic cells that had been treated with exogenous C16:0 ceramide showed lysosomal alterations, including increased acidification and volume. Endolysosomal Alterations Are Specific of Timing and Origin of Ceramide Stress The analysis demonstrates how endolysosomes respond to ceramide enrichment induced by (i) blocked degradation, (ii) enzymatic production, and (iii) exogenous supply. All conditions induce the reorganization of membrane proteins and endolysosomal membranes, evident by many different alterations of protein structure and protein–lipid interactions. However, the dose, timing, and origin of ceramide stress result in distinct effects on composition, structure, and interaction of these molecules. When higher concentrations of the AC inhibitor SACLAC were applied ( Figure B,D–F), endolysosomes display structural features that can be related to dysfunction, indicating that a stronger inhibition of AC could exceed the capacity of the cells to maintain endolysosomal homeostasis by adaptation in composition. It was shown that AC inhibition by SACLAC can lead to accumulation of ceramide with long fatty chains in different acute myeloid leukemia cells, including C16 ceramide species that are most often pro-apoptotic. When SACLAC prevents the breakdown of ceramide to sphingosine, a consequent decrease was also observed for the further metabolic product sphingosine-1-phosphate (S1P), a pro-survival lipid, that together with ceramide constitutes a crucial sphingolipid rheostat to determine cellular death or proliferation. , The addition of SACLAC in a high concentration likely disturbs the balance between ceramide and S1P in the endolysosomes, thereby leading to more complex molecular changes. The spectral changes in phospholipid composition and packing are likely a consequence of altered lipid composition, caused, e.g., by depletion of S1P by the action of SACLAC. In the experiments where endolysosomes containing nanoprobes had formed before the inhibitor SACLAC could act on the AC enzyme ( Scheme A), more signatures of destabilized protein structures were found ( Figure A,B). We conclude from this that the attempt of the cell to buffer the acute increase of ceramide involves major modifications in protein structure and composition. In contrast, exposure to the inhibitor before optical nanoprobes incubation ( Scheme B), i.e., probing of endolysosomes that form during the ongoing enzyme inhibition, yields more spectral features related to protein–lipid interfaces ( Figure C–F). In this situation, a process of metabolic adaptation has already been taking place, and different requirements or consequences in endolysosome formation include the organization of proteins at the endolysosomal membrane of altered lipid composition and structure. Such differences reflect the sensitivity of the endolysosomal environment to the timing of interactions between the affected molecules and the probing nanoparticles. Compared to AC inhibition, direct ceramide generation via additional ASM in the endolysosomes clearly indicates changes of protein and lipid stabilization evidenced by signals from the protein backbones and lipid composition and structure ( Figure G). In addition to a known rapid ceramide production, , the decrease in sphingomyelin due to its enhanced consumption may lead to changes in membrane properties and function, including the association with membrane proteins. The observed spectral changes of cholesterol and phospholipids (seen in Figure ) are in line with different lipid profiles that are a consequence of the depletion of sphingomyelin by increased ASM activity on the one hand and on the other hand a necessity to maintain endolysosomal homeostasis in the presence of excessive ceramide levels. In contrast to the accumulation of ceramide in situ by modified enzyme action, the spectral differences observed in the cells exposed to exogenous ceramide ( Figure ) reflect an endolysosomal response to actual systemic cell stress. Exogenous ceramide is metabolized to sphingomyelin and glucosylceramide in the Golgi apparatus, before it is transferred to the plasma membrane via vesicular transport pathways or lipid-transfer proteins. The adaptation of the Golgi apparatus and plasma membrane to increased lipid levels may lead to changes in endolysosomal lipid composition and different protein–membrane interactions through lipid traffic between compartments. As a pro-apoptotic agent, C16-ceramide was also shown to induce cytotoxicity in adenocarcinoma HCT116 cells partially via apoptotic processes, indicated by increased caspase-3 activity and poly­(ADP-ribose) polymerase cleavage. Ceramide Stress Changes the Endosomal and Mitochondrial Ultrastructure and Processing of Gold Nanoprobes The ultrastructures of the manipulated cells and the distribution of the optical nanoprobes were characterized by soft X-ray nanotomography (SXT). Upon inhibition of AC by SACLAC, some vesicular structures are observed to have lost their typical spherical shape and instead display angular outlines in the tomographic slices (blue asterisks in Figures A–C, and S9A ,C). In the cells exposed to SACLAC at 10 μM ( Figures B and S9B, C), ASM ( Figures D and S9D ), and ceramide at 5 μM ( Figure E), several vesicles show significant heterogeneity and high complexity, indicated by red markings. The abnormal shapes and multivesicular structures likely represent endolysosomes undergoing membrane reorganization and morphological alteration due to an overload of ceramide. − Ceramide can form distinct microdomains in phospholipid membranes through strong headgroup interactions, leading to significant changes in membrane organization. These properties affect the ultrastructure and interaction of ceramide containing vesicles outside and inside cells. For example, ceramide generated by enzyme application can trigger vectorial vesicle formation including endocytosis and budding in giant liposomes composed of phosphatidylcholine and sphingomyelin. Such changes at the ultrastructural level were shown to have a direct influence on the biological function of the affected cells and tissues. In mouse fibroblast cells, exogenously added C6-ceramide was found to induce rapid and reversible endocytic vesicle formation, and fibroblasts from Farber disease (AC activity deficient) patients were reported to contain swollen lysosomes with lamellar and curvilinear membrane inclusions. 5 Reconstructed X-ray tomograms of 3T3 cells incubated with (A) 1 μM SACLAC and (B) 10 μM SACLAC for 24 h after incubation with gold nanoparticles for 24 h (cf. Scheme A), (C) with gold nanoparticles for 24 h after incubation in the culture medium with 10 μM SACLAC for 24 h (cf. Scheme B), with (D) 200 nM ASM for 3 h (cf. Scheme C) and (E) 5 μM ceramide for 15 min (cf. Scheme D) after incubation with gold nanoparticles for 24 h, and (F) with gold nanoparticles for 24 h as the control sample. Additional tomograms of the cells exposed to SACLAC and ASM are shown in Figure S9 . M: mitochondrion, V: vesicle, NM: nuclear membrane, N: nucleus, LD: lipid droplets, ER: endoplasmic reticulum. Gold nanostructures are marked with yellow arrowheads. Red dots and blue asterisks mark the affected vesicles. Scale bar: 2 μm. The drastic changes in endolysosome ultrastructure are in agreement with changes of lipid composition and organization exhibited by the spectral data and together with them underpin the disruption of lipid metabolic balance by SACLAC, ASM, and exogenous ceramide. Elongated mitochondrial networks, a small number of condensed, dark structures, and swollen structures with visible cristae were observed in all treated cells ( Figures A–E, S9A–D ) but not in the controls ( Figure F). This suggests that the mitochondria undergo mild stress due to the affected endolysosomal metabolism and is in agreement with the fragmentation and conformational changes of membrane proteins that is revealed by the corresponding spectral features and their relations ( Figures and ). Future work will use mitochondria-targeted SERS probes to explore vibrational changes upon lipid regulation in the mitochondrial compartment as well. The processing of the gold nanoparticles that were used as optical nanoprobes in the SERS experiments and the properties of their intraendolysosomal agglomerates were also analyzed, as they provide information on an endolysosomal ultrastructure, as well. The gold nanoparticles form loose aggregates of irregular shapes in the vesicular structures throughout endocytic processing, in agreement with our previous findings in this and other cell lines. , , The sizes of the nanoaggregates vary according to the distinct interference with ceramide metabolism. When exposure to the AC inhibitor SACLAC followed the endocytosis of gold nanoprobes ( Scheme A), larger agglomerates were observed in a size range of around 40–840 nm ( Figures A and S9A ), similar to the maximum size of about 500 nm in the control samples ( Figure F). With higher SACLAC concentration, small aggregates and/or individual particles were observed with significantly higher frequency ( Figures B and S9B ). The latter observation supports the conclusions drawn from the spectral data that contributions to the spectra from adenine and destabilized proteins ( Figure B) likely result from the vesicular destabilization observed here. The possibility of vesicle disintegration as a consequence of stronger ceramidase inhibition is supported by work that reported leakage of vesicle content after ceramide accumulation in phospholipid membranes. When the cells were first exposed to SACLAC at high concentration and only later to the nanoparticles ( Scheme B), a higher number of aggregates were found in the size range of 100–300 nm. Some aggregates even reach sizes of up to 1200 nm ( Figures C and S9C ). In this condition, the cell membrane composition and endolysosomal environment, which has already adapted to high ceramide content, likely promotes the uptake of gold nanoparticles and has an influence on the endosomal fusion and formation of larger structures. An extensive uptake of nanoprobes and their aggregates agrees with a broader set of endolysosomal changes captured in the SERS data, as determined by SMD analysis ( Figure D). The size of the intracellular agglomerates of the gold nanoparticles also increases when ceramide content is increased by additional ASM ( Figure D) and exogenous ceramide ( Figure E), reaching a maximum of around 950 and 820 nm, respectively. However, neither the presence of small aggregates indicative of vesicle disintegration nor altered geometric shapes of endolysosomal vesicles were found upon these treatments, unlike in the cells incubated with SACLAC ( Figures A–C and S9 A–C). Degradation of both ceramide and ASM can play a role here. Ceramide can be converted into sphingosine, glucosylceramide, and other sphingolipids. Like other proteins targeted to the lysosome, recombinant ASM would be eventually degraded by other lysosomal enzymes such as cathepsins. , Compared to the irreversible inhibition of AC when the cells are exposed to SACLAC for 24 h, the short-term exposure to ASM for 3 h and the Golgi-targeted exogenous ceramide for 15 min may not manifests in detectable changes to the ultrastructure, despite the changes in molecular composition and structure detected in the endolysosomes by optical nanospectroscopy. Conclusions We analyzed the changes in molecular structure and interactions in the endolysosomal microenvironment of fibroblast cells with elevated ceramide content based on SERS spectra in combination with 3D ultrastructural information from nanotomography. As indicated by the vibrational bands and their relations, elevated ceramide levels, generated by (i) the inhibition of AC inhibitor SACLAC, (ii) increased synthesis of ceramide with supplemented recombinant ASM, and (iii) exogenous ceramide, have distinct biochemical effects. Our data show that the regulation of ceramide as necessary response via known metabolic pathways is accompanied by specific endolysosomal molecular changes, also when cytotoxicity is low or absent. Several changes in the molecular makeup in the endolysosomal environment that include the stability of membrane structures, protein composition and structure, and protein–lipid interactions are supported by the morphological constitution of this compartment and its processing of the optical gold nanoprobes, as well as in the ultrastructure of mitochondria, as revealed by nanotomography. The biochemical response to ceramide stress in the endolysosomes displays diverse spectral signatures dependent on the dose, enzymatic pathway, and origin of built-up ceramide. The induction of ceramide stress as a consequence of the modulated enzyme activity and addition of external ceramide, respectively, was found to affect the protein–lipid interactions and is likely connected to the structure and function of the endolysosomes. These indirect changes in this compartment have so far not been captured by state-of-the-art optical microscopy, using conventional labeling methods. The spectral data indicate that the onset of AC inhibition relative to the formation of the probed endolysosomes determines how the stability and interactions of proteins with lipids are affected by high ceramide levels. Changes in the size and stability of endolysosomes that form during ongoing inhibition of AC observed by nanotomography support this observation. The relation of spectral differences indicates that higher AC inhibitor concentrations disturb the endolysosomal homeostasis to a greater extent, as indicated by dysfunction-related vibrational markers. Promoting sphingomyelin hydrolysis by additional ASM yields ceramide enrichment as well, yet the resulting differences in protein and lipid stabilization show other specifics, particularly changed interactions of membrane proteins in the cholesterol-rich membrane regions. In contrast, the addition of external ceramide was found to impact the endolysosomal conditions indirectly via its involvement in lipid metabolic processing and trafficking processes from the Golgi and induced subtle interaction changes of proteins and nearby membranes in a dose-dependent manner. The identification of such small dose-dependent effects was achieved by a comparison of the molecular effects in situ in the cells under slightly varied experimental conditions. The detailed information on a specific molecular structure and interaction illustrates the methodological advantage of the applied data analysis approach, which relies on SMD and the utilization of relationships of characteristic spectral features. Together with the highly localized collection of the SERS data from the endolysosomal volumes, the indicated relationships and/or co-occurrences of signals of particular functional groups or molecules allow us to identify weak, complex interactions between colocalized biomolecules in living cells. In future work, probing of other cellular compartments, such as mitochondria, by this approach will provide further insights into the activity of these and other enzymes, possibilities for their manipulation, and a better understanding of the effects thereof at the subcellular level. Experimental Section Preparation of Gold Nanoparticles, SACLAC, and ASM Gold­(III) chloride hydrate, sodium citrate dehydrate, and ceramide were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich (Steinheim, Germany). Citrate-stabilized gold nanoparticles (∼30 nm) were synthesized following the protocol in ref using solutions prepared with Milli-Q ultrapure water. SACLAC was synthesized as described in ref ASM was expressed in insect Sf9 cells and purified to homogeneity following the protocol described in ref . Cell Culture and Sample Preparation The Swiss albino mouse fibroblast cell line 3T3 (DSMZ, Braunschweig, Germany) was cultured in Dulbecco’s Modified Eagle’s Medium (DMEM, Bio&amp;SELL, Nürnberg, Germany) containing 10% fetal calf serum (FCS, Biochrom, Berlin, Germany) at 37 °C with 5% CO 2 . All cells prepared for SERS experiments were grown on glass coverslips. For SERS experiments of SACLAC treatment after nanoprobe incubation ( Scheme A), ASM treatment ( Scheme C), and incubation with exogenous ceramide ( Scheme D), the cells were grown on glass coverslips for 24 h. Then, the culture medium was exchanged with a dilution of gold nanoparticles in DMEM-FCS of 1:10 (nanoparticle concentration ∼10–11 M) for 24 h. The cells were rinsed with phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) (Bio&amp;SELL, Nürnberg, Germany) to remove excess gold nanoparticles. For SACLAC treatment and ASM treatment, the cells were incubated at 37 °C in DMEM-FCS with 1 μM and 10 μM SACLAC for 24 h and with 200 nM ASM for 3 h, respectively. Control samples corresponding to Scheme A,C were incubated at 37 °C in fresh DMEM-FCS for 24 and 3 h, respectively, after the incubation with gold nanoparticles for 24 h. For incubation with exogenous ceramide, the culture medium was exchanged with DMEM-FCS containing 1 μM, 5 μM, 10 μM, and 15 μM ceramide. Cells were incubated at 4 °C for 30 min, then rinsed with PBS, and grown in fresh DMEM-FCS at 37 °C for 15 min as proposed previously. Control samples corresponding to Scheme D were incubated at 4 °C for 30 min and then at 37 °C for 15 min in fresh DMEM-FCS, after incubation with gold nanoparticles for 24 h. For incubation with the gold nanoprobes in cells that were pretreated with SACLAC ( Scheme B), cells were grown with 1 and 10 μM SACLAC in DMEM-FCS at 37 °C for 24 h. Then, the culture medium was exchanged with a dilution of gold nanoparticles in DMEM-FCS of 1:10 (nanoparticle concentration ∼10–11 M) for 24 h. Control samples were grown in DMEM-FCS at 37 °C for 24 h and then incubated with gold nanoparticles for 24 h. All cell samples were prepared across two independent cell passages (biological replicates). For each condition, cells were cultured in the three wells of 6-well plates. SERS experiments on the cells were collected from a minimum of eight randomly selected cells in PBS after rinsing with PBS three times, resulting in over 3200 spectra per condition. To prepare the samples for cryo soft X-ray nanotomography (SXT), cells were grown on Formvar-coated gold grids (Quantifoil, Jena, Germany) and incubated as described above. After the incubation, each grid was rinsed three times with PBS, the excess buffer was blotted with filter paper, and the grids were plunge-frozen in liquid ethane. SERS Experiments Raman spectra of the cytoplasm of cells were obtained in a microspectroscopic setup by excitation with a 785 nm diode laser (Toptica, Munich, Germany) by using a single-stage spectrograph equipped with a CCD detector (Horiba, Munich, Germany). A 60× water immersion objective was applied, resulting in an intensity of 2.7 × 10 5 W/cm 2 at the sample. The focal volume was ∼10 fL. All spectra were recorded with an acquisition time of 1 s and at a spectral resolution of ∼2 cm –1 , considering the full spectral range used from 300 to 1900 cm –1 . Cryo Soft X-ray Tomography A transmission X-ray microscope equipped with a cryostage at beamline U41-PGM1-XM at the electron storage ring BESSY II (Helmholtz-Zentrum Berlin für Materialien und Energie, Berlin, Germany) was employed to examine vitrified cell monolayers with a thickness of approximately 10 μm. For each individual cell, tilt series composed of up to 130 images were acquired in 1° steps across multiple angular ranges with a pixel resolution of 9.8 or 6.9 nm (25 nm zone plate objective) at a 510 eV photon energy condition. Depending on the sample thickness, the exposure time was adjusted for each tilt angle series between 1 and 4 s per image. With intracellular gold nanoparticles as fiducial markers, corrected tilt series were reconstructed into tomograms with Etomo software (IMOD, Colorado, USA), using the back-projection or simultaneous iterative reconstruction technique. Data Analysis The SERS spectra were frequency-calibrated using a toluene–acetonitrile mixture (1:1) standard and preprocessed in MatLab R2020b (The MathWorks, Inc., Natick, MA, USA) including spike removal, baseline correction using asymmetric least-squares, and vector-normalization. Only the spectra with detectable signals were kept for further analyses, using the full spectral range from 400 to 1800 cm –1 . Average spectra of each condition were calculated for a further qualitative analysis of the SERS signals. Relative occurrences of signals were evaluated in Mathematica 12.1 (Wolfram, Champaign, IL, USA) following a method previously reported. Briefly, the integrals of the spectra were calculated by moving an integral window selected here to be ±10 cm –1 around a central wavenumber, with predefined steps between central wavenumbers, chosen here to amount to 5 cm –1 . If the integral at a central wavenumber exceeds the average integral in a signal-free reference spectrum by a defined threshold, then a signal is summed up in the given central wavenumber bin. This was performed at every central wavenumber for each individual spectrum, yielding a histogram. PC analysis (PCA) was performed with the preprocessed individual SERS spectra in MatLab R2020b. RF and SMD analyses were conducted in R 4.2.2 using ranger 0.15.1 and RFSurrogates 0.4.2, , respectively. For each comparison, an RF classification model was trained to differentiate between the spectra of the respective conditions and the control samples. This model was trained using 80% of the spectra that were randomly selected, and the remaining 20% of the spectra were used as test data. For training, the number of trees ( num.trees ) and the number of variables to consider in each split ( mtry ) were set to 10′000 and 161 (corresponding to p 3/4 , where p is the total number of spectral variables), respectively. SMD was performed by using the RF parameters defined above and a predefined number of surrogate splits ( s ) of 88, corresponding to 0.10 p . Important variables were selected based on the SMD importance score with lower value indicating greater importance. Consequently, variables with SMD values below the defined threshold were selected and the MAA for pairwise relationships of each spectral variable was determined. For clarity, the variable with the lowest SMD importance value served as representative for one signal. Their MAA values to all p spectral variables were depicted to visualize the relation between the important signals and spectral variables characteristic of specific molecules. Supplementary Material The authors thank Lars Dannenberg (HU) for the synthesis of the gold nanoparticles. The provision of beamtime at beamline U41-PGM1-XM of HZB-BESSY II, Berlin, is gratefully acknowledged. The Supporting Information is available free of charge at https://pubs.acs.org/doi/10.1021/acsnano.5c22213 . Spectral data from control samples in the experiments with cells treated with SACLAC; viability of cells after treatment with SACLAC; PC analysis of spectra from cells treated with SACLAC; PC analysis of spectra from cells exposed to additional ASM; RF-based analysis of SERS spectra from 3T3 cells treated with SACLAC and ASM; SERS data of cells incubated with ceramide at different concentrations; PC analysis of SERS spectra from cells treated with ceramide; RF-based analysis of SERS spectra from 3T3 cells treated with ceramide; and soft X-ray tomograms of 3T3 cells treated with SACLAC and ASM ( PDF ) # Chemistry Department, Faculty of Science, Suez Canal University, Ismailia 41522, Egypt The manuscript was written through contributions of all authors. All authors have given approval to the final version of the manuscript. Y.F. acknowledges the funding by the Einstein Center of Catalysis/Berlin International School of Natural Sciences and Engineering (EC2/BIG-NSE). Y.F. and C.S. were supported by Germany’s Excellence Strategy (EXC 2008390540038UniSysCat). J.K. and S.S. acknowledge the funding by Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG) grant 511107129. The authors declare no competing financial interest. Abbreviations ASM acid sphingomyelinase CER ceramide PCA principal component analysis RF random forest SACLAC N-[(2 S ,3 R )-1,3-dihydroxyoctadecan-2-yl]­2-chloroacetamide SERS surface-enhanced Raman scattering SMD surrogate minimal depth Castro B. M. Prieto M. Silva L. C. Ceramide A. Simple Sphingolipid with Unique Biophysical Properties Prog. Lipid Res. 2014 54 53 67 10.1016/j.plipres.2014.01.004 24513486 Gulbins E. Kolesnick R. Raft Ceramide in Molecular Medicine Oncogene 2003 22 7070 7077 10.1038/sj.onc.1207146 14557812 Goni F. M. Alonso A. Biophysics of Sphingolipids I. Membrane Properties of Sphingosine, Ceramides and Other Simple Sphingolipids Biochim. Biophys. Acta Gen. Subj. 2006 1758 1902 1921 10.1016/j.bbamem.2006.09.011 17070498 Hannun Y. A. Obeid L. M. The Ceramide-Centric Universe of Lipid-Mediated Cell Regulation: Stress Encounters of the Lipid Kind J. Biol. Chem. 2002 277 25847 25850 10.1074/jbc.R200008200 12011103 Saied E. M. Arenz C. Inhibitors of Ceramidases Chem. Phys. Lipids 2016 197 60 68 10.1016/j.chemphyslip.2015.07.009 26220616 Goñi F. M. Alonso A. Sphingomyelinases: Enzymology and Membrane Activity FEBS Lett. 2002 531 38 46 10.1016/S0014-5793(02)03482-8 12401200 Chen W. W. Decker G. L. Abnormalities of Lysosomes in Human Diploid Fibroblasts from Patients with Farber’s Disease Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1982 718 185 192 10.1016/0304-4165(82)90218-5 6814495 Gabandé-Rodríguez E. Boya P. Labrador V. Dotti C. G. Ledesma M. D. High Sphingomyelin Levels Induce Lysosomal Damage and Autophagy Dysfunction in Niemann Pick Disease Type A Cell Death Differ. 2014 21 864 875 10.1038/cdd.2014.4 24488099 PMC4013520 Zhang Y. Li X. Carpinteiro A. Gulbins E. Acid Sphingomyelinase Amplifies Redox Signaling in Pseudomonas Aeruginosa Induced Macrophage Apoptosis J. Immunol. 2008 181 4247 4254 10.4049/jimmunol.181.6.4247 18768882 Pearson J. M. Tan S.-F. Sharma A. Annageldiyev C. Fox T. E. Abad J. L. Fabrias G. Desai D. Amin S. Wang H.-G. Cabot M. C. Claxton D. F. Kester M. Feith D. J. Loughran T. P. Ceramide Analogue SACLAC Modulates Sphingolipid Levels and MCL-1 Splicing to Induce Apoptosis in Acute Myeloid Leukemia Mol. Cancer Res. 2020 18 352 363 10.1158/1541-7786.MCR-19-0619 31744877 PMC7056541 Živanović V. Seifert S. Drescher D. Schrade P. Werner S. Guttmann P. Szekeres G. P. Bachmann S. Schneider G. Arenz C. Kneipp J. Optical Nanosensing of Lipid Accumulation Due to Enzyme Inhibition in Live Cells ACS Nano 2019 13 9363 9375 10.1021/acsnano.9b04001 31314989 Huo Y. Liu X. Lu C. Li T. Yang Z. Xu F. Chen S. Yin K. Wang L. Ceramide Mediates Cell-to-Cell Er Stress Transmission by Modulating Membrane Fluidity J. Cell Biol. 2025 224 e202405060 10.1083/jcb.202405060 40136051 PMC11938942 Rego A. Costa M. Chaves S. R. Matmati N. Pereira H. Sousa M. J. Moradas-Ferreira P. Hannun Y. A. Costa V. Côrte-Real M. Modulation of Mitochondrial Outer Membrane Permeabilization and Apoptosis by Ceramide Metabolism PLoS One 2012 7 e48571 10.1371/journal.pone.0048571 23226203 PMC3511487 Vos M. Dulovic-Mahlow M. Mandik F. Frese L. Kanana Y. Haissatou Diaw S. Depperschmidt J. Böhm C. Rohr J. Lohnau T. König I. R. Klein C. Ceramide Accumulation Induces Mitophagy and Impairs Β -Oxidation in PINK1 Deficiency Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 2021 118 e2025347118 10.1073/pnas.2025347118 34686591 PMC8639384 Perera R. M. Zoncu R. The Lysosome as a Regulatory Hub Annu. Rev. Cell Dev. Biol. 2016 32 223 253 10.1146/annurev-cellbio-111315-125125 27501449 PMC9345128 Zhang R. Vooijs M. A. Keulers T. G. Key Mechanisms in Lysosome Stability, Degradation and Repair Mol. Cell. Biol. 2025 45 212 224 10.1080/10985549.2025.2494762 40340648 PMC12352500 Hartwig P. Höglinger D. The Glucosylceramide Synthase Inhibitor PDMP Causes Lysosomal Lipid Accumulation and mTOR Inactivation Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2021 22 7065 10.3390/ijms22137065 34209164 PMC8268262 Sands M. S. Farber Disease: Understanding a Fatal Childhood Disorder and Dissecting Ceramide Biology EMBO Mol. Med. 2013 5 799 801 10.1002/emmm.201302781 23666771 PMC3779442 Arenz C. Recent Advances and Novel Treatments for Sphingolipidoses Future Med. Chem. 2017 9 1687 1700 10.4155/fmc-2017-0065 28857617 Rist B. L. Witte S. A. Schultz Z. D. Machine Learning Classification of Integrin-Expression-Based Magnetic Sorted SW 620 Cells by Simultaneous O-PTIR and SERS Anal. Chem. 2024 96 17184 17191 10.1021/acs.analchem.4c02685 39412786 PMC12140086 Scarpitti B. T. Chitchumroonchokchai C. Clinton S. K. Schultz Z. D. In Vitro Imaging of Lycopene Delivery to Prostate Cancer Cells Anal. Chem. 2022 94 5106 5112 10.1021/acs.analchem.1c05442 35289593 PMC8969194 Hojjat Jodaylami M. Sanvi O. Y. Rungta R. L. Kolta A. Masson J.-F. Surface-Enhanced Raman Scattering Nanoendoscope for Quantification of a Protein Released under Physiological Stimulation in Brain Tissue ACS Nano 2024 18 35075 35087 10.1021/acsnano.4c15378 39656894 García-Astrain C. Henriksen-Lacey M. Lenzi E. Renero-Lecuna C. Langer J. Piñeiro P. Molina-Martínez B. Plou J. Jimenez de Aberasturi D. Liz-Marzán L. M. A Scaffold-Assisted 3D Cancer Cell Model for Surface-Enhanced Raman Scattering-Based Real-Time Sensing and Imaging ACS Nano 2024 18 11257 11269 10.1021/acsnano.4c00543 38632933 PMC11064228 Huefner A. Septiadi D. Wilts B. D. Patel I. I. Kuan W.-L. Fragniere A. Barker R. A. Mahajan S. Gold Nanoparticles Explore Cells: Cellular Uptake and Their Use as Intracellular Probes Methods 2014 68 354 363 10.1016/j.ymeth.2014.02.006 24583117 Jang H. Kang K. El-Sayed M. A. Real-Time Tracking of the Autophagy Process in Living Cells Using Plasmonically Enhanced Raman Spectroscopy of Fucoidan-Coated Gold Nanoparticles J. Mater. Chem. B 2018 6 5460 5465 10.1039/C8TB01402G 32254605 Altunbek M. Çetin D. Suludere Z. Çulha M. Surface-Enhanced Raman Spectroscopy Based 3D Spheroid Culture for Drug Discovery Studies Talanta 2019 191 390 399 10.1016/j.talanta.2018.08.087 30262075 Koike K. Bando K. Ando J. Yamakoshi H. Terayama N. Dodo K. Smith N. I. Sodeoka M. Fujita K. Quantitative Drug Dynamics Visualized by Alkyne-Tagged Plasmonic-Enhanced Raman Microscopy ACS Nano 2020 14 15032 15041 10.1021/acsnano.0c05010 33079538 Szekeres G. P. Montes-Bayón M. Bettmer J. Kneipp J. Fragmentation of Proteins in the Corona of Gold Nanoparticles as Observed in Live Cell Surface-Enhanced Raman Scattering Anal. Chem. 2020 92 8553 8560 10.1021/acs.analchem.0c01404 32420733 Kneipp J. Seifert S. Gärber F. SERS Microscopy as a Tool for Comprehensive Biochemical Characterization in Complex Samples Chem. Soc. Rev. 2024 53 7641 7656 10.1039/D4CS00460D 38934892 Feng Y. Gärber F. Saied E. M. Spedalieri C. Kochovski Z. Werner S. Pratsch C. Arenz C. Seifert S. Kneipp J. SERS Spectra Indicate the Molecular Effects of 7-Nitrobenz-2-oxa-1,3-diazole (NBD) on Living Cells J. Phys. Chem. C 2024 128 19722 19735 10.1021/acs.jpcc.4c05260 Seifert S. Application of Random Forest Based Approaches to Surface-Enhanced Raman Scattering Data Sci. Rep. 2020 10 5436 10.1038/s41598-020-62338-8 32214194 PMC7096517 Seifert S. Gundlach S. Szymczak S. Surrogate Minimal Depth as an Importance Measure for Variables in Random Forests Bioinformatics 2019 35 3663 3671 10.1093/bioinformatics/btz149 30824905 PMC6761946 Rohmann N. Stürmer P. Geisler C. Schlicht K. Knappe C. Hartmann K. Türk K. Hollstein T. Beckmann A. Seoudy A. K. Becker U. Wietzke-Braun P. Settgast U. Tran F. Rosenstiel P. Beckmann J. H. von Schönfels W. Seifert S. Heyckendorf J. Franke A. Schreiber S. Effects of Lifestyle and Associated Diseases on Serum CC16 Suggest Complex Interactions among Metabolism, Heart and Lungs J. Adv. Res. 2024 59 161 171 10.1016/j.jare.2023.06.005 37330047 PMC11081936 Wenck S. Bachmann R. Barmbold S.-M. Horns A. L. Paasch N. Seifert S. Authentication of Apples (Malus × Domestica Borkh.) According to Geographical Origin, Variety and Production Method Using 1h Nmr Spectroscopy and Random Forest Food Control 2025 167 110817 10.1016/j.foodcont.2024.110817 PMC12345882 40807597 Wenck S. Creydt M. Hansen J. Gärber F. Fischer M. Seifert S. Wenck S. Creydt M. Hansen J. Gärber F. Fischer M. Seifert S. Opening the Random Forest Black Box of the Metabolome by the Application of Surrogate Minimal Depth Metabolites 2021 12 5 10.3390/metabo12010005 35050127 PMC8781913 Brettschneider K. C. Seifert S. Fusion of Food Profiling Data from Very Different Analytical Techniques Curr. Opin. Food Sci. 2025 61 101256 10.1016/j.cofs.2024.101256 Gärber F. Bockmayr B. Creydt M. Fischer M. Seifert S. Data Fusion of Elemental and Metabolic Fingerprints of Asparagus with Random Forest Approaches Anal. Chim. Acta 2025 1357 344006 10.1016/j.aca.2025.344006 40316379 Lösel H. Brockelt J. Gärber F. Teipel J. Kuballa T. Seifert S. Fischer M. Lösel H. Brockelt J. Gärber F. Teipel J. Kuballa T. Seifert S. Fischer M. Comparative Analysis of LC-ESI-IM-qToF-MS and FT-NIR Spectroscopy Approaches for the Authentication of Organic and Conventional Eggs Metabolites 2023 13 882 10.3390/metabo13080882 37623826 PMC10456441 Ashish K. Ramesh T. Kalle R. Arumugam R. Generalization of Threats Attributed to Large Carnivores in Areas of High Human–Wildlife Conflict Conserv. Biol. 2022 36 e13974 10.1111/cobi.13974 35796039 PMC9805120 Ordóñez Y. F. Abad J. L. Aseeri M. Casas J. Garcia V. Casasampere M. Schuchman E. H. Levade T. Delgado A. Triola G. Fabrias G. Activity-Based Imaging of Acid Ceramidase in Living Cells J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2019 141 7736 7742 10.1021/jacs.8b11687 31030513 Pezzotti G. Raman Spectroscopy in Cell Biology and Microbiology J. Raman Spectrosc. 2021 52 2348 2443 10.1002/jrs.6204 Spedalieri C. Szekeres G. P. Werner S. Guttmann P. Kneipp J. Intracellular Optical Probing with Gold Nanostars Nanoscale 2021 13 968 979 10.1039/D0NR07031A 33367430 Movasaghi Z. Rehman S. Rehman I. U. Raman Spectroscopy of Biological Tissues Appl. Spectrosc. Rev. 2007 42 493 541 10.1080/05704920701551530 Peter Szekeres G. Werner S. Guttmann P. Spedalieri C. Drescher D. Živanović V. Montes-Bayón M. Bettmer J. Kneipp J. Relating the Composition and Interface Interactions in the Hard Corona of Gold Nanoparticles to the Induced Response Mechanisms in Living Cells Nanoscale 2020 12 17450 17461 10.1039/d0nr03581e 32856032 Parker , F. S. Applications of Infrared, Raman, and Resonance Raman Spectroscopy in Biochemistry ; Springer Science &amp; Business Media , 1983 . Lopez-Tobar E. Hernández B. n. Ghomi M. Sanchez-Cortes S. Stability of the Disulfide Bond in Cystine Adsorbed on Silver and Gold Nanoparticles as Evidenced by SERS Data J. Phys. Chem. C 2013 117 1531 1537 10.1021/jp3112606 Rothschild K. J. Andrew J. R. De Grip W. J. Stanley H. E. Opsin Structure Probed by Raman Spectroscopy of Photoreceptor Membranes Science 1976 191 1176 1178 10.1126/science.1257742 1257742 Notingher I. Green C. Dyer C. Perkins E. Hopkins N. Lindsay C. Hench L. L. Discrimination between Ricin and Sulphur Mustard Toxicity in Vitro Using Raman Spectroscopy J. R. Soc. Interface 2004 1 79 90 10.1098/rsif.2004.0008 16849154 PMC1618929 Tang S. Gao S. Xu J. Zheng M. Huang Y. Yu Y. Lin J. A Novel Serum Protein Purification Technique Combined with Surface-Enhanced Raman Spectroscopy for Liver Cancer Detection Spectrosc. Lett. 2021 54 113 121 10.1080/00387010.2020.1867186 Guillard E. Tfayli A. Manfait M. Baillet-Guffroy A. Thermal Dependence of Raman Descriptors of Ceramides. Part II: Effect of Chains Lengths and Head Group Structures Anal. Bioanal. Chem. 2011 399 1201 1213 10.1007/s00216-010-4389-x 21069298 Tfayli A. Guillard E. Manfait M. Baillet-Guffroy A. Molecular Interactions of Penetration Enhancers within Ceramides Organization: A Raman Spectroscopy Approach Analyst 2012 137 5002 10.1039/c2an35220f 23000832 Feng Y. Kochovski Z. Arenz C. Lu Y. Kneipp J. Structure and Interaction of Ceramide-Containing Liposomes with Gold Nanoparticles as Characterized by SERS and Cryo-EM J. Phys. Chem. C 2022 126 13237 13246 10.1021/acs.jpcc.2c01930 PMC9377338 35983312 Živanović V. Kochovski Z. Arenz C. Lu Y. Kneipp J. SERS and Cryo-EM Directly Reveal Different Liposome Structures During Interaction with Gold Nanoparticles J. Phys. Chem. Lett. 2018 9 6767 6772 10.1021/acs.jpclett.8b03191 30421928 Garidel P. Folting B. Schaller I. Kerth A. The Microstructure of the Stratum Corneum Lipid Barrier: Mid-Infrared Spectroscopic Studies of Hydrated Ceramide:Palmitic Acid:Cholesterol Model Systems Biophys. Chem. 2010 150 144 156 10.1016/j.bpc.2010.03.008 20457485 Bazylewski P. Divigalpitiya R. Fanchini G. In Situ Raman Spectroscopy Distinguishes between Reversible and Irreversible Thiol Modifications in L -Cysteine RSC Adv. 2017 7 2964 2970 10.1039/C6RA25879D Podstawka E. Ozaki Y. Proniewicz L. M. Part III: Surface-Enhanced Raman Scattering of Amino Acids and Their Homodipeptide Monolayers Deposited onto Colloidal Gold Surface Appl. Spectrosc. 2005 59 1516 1526 10.1366/000370205775142520 16390592 Živanović V. Milewska A. Leosson K. Kneipp J. Molecular Structure and Interactions of Lipids in the Outer Membrane of Living Cells Based on Surface-Enhanced Raman Scattering and Liposome Models Anal. Chem. 2021 93 10106 10113 10.1021/acs.analchem.1c00964 34264630 Stancevic B. Kolesnick R. Ceramide-Rich Platforms in Transmembrane Signaling FEBS Lett. 2010 584 1728 1740 10.1016/j.febslet.2010.02.026 20178791 PMC4440589 Stone N. Kendall C. Smith J. Crow P. Barr H. Raman Spectroscopy for Identification of Epithelial Cancers Faraday Discuss. 2004 126 141 157 10.1039/b304992b 14992404 Posor Y. Jang W. Haucke V. Phosphoinositides as Membrane Organizers Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol. 2022 23 797 816 10.1038/s41580-022-00490-x 35589852 PMC9117997 Breiden B. Sandhoff K. Acid Sphingomyelinase, a Lysosomal and Secretory Phospholipase C, Is Key for Cellular Phospholipid Catabolism Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2021 22 9001 10.3390/ijms22169001 34445706 PMC8396676 Zeidan Y. H. Jenkins R. W. Hannun Y. A. Remodeling of Cellular Cytoskeleton by the Acid Sphingomyelinase/Ceramide Pathway J. Cell Biol. 2008 181 335 350 10.1083/jcb.200705060 18426979 PMC2315679 Simon I. Hedesiu M. Virag P. Salmon B. Tarmure V. Baciut M. Bran S. Jacobs R. Falamas A. Raman Micro-Spectroscopy of Dental Pulp Stem Cells: An Approach to Monitor the Effects of Cone Beam Computed Tomography Low-Dose Ionizing Radiation Anal. Lett. 2019 52 1097 1111 10.1080/00032719.2018.1516771 Ermini L. Farrell A. Alahari S. Ausman J. Park C. Sallais J. Melland-Smith M. Porter T. Edson M. Nevo O. Litvack M. Post M. Caniggia I. Ceramide-Induced Lysosomal Biogenesis and Exocytosis in Early-Onset Preeclampsia Promotes Exosomal Release of SMPD1 Causing Endothelial Dysfunction Front. Cell Dev. Biol. 2021 9 652651 10.3389/fcell.2021.652651 34017832 PMC8130675 Miura T. Takeuchi H. Harada I. Characterization of Individual Tryptophan Side Chains in Proteins Using Raman Spectroscopy and Hydrogen-Deuterium Exchange Kinetics Biochemistry 1988 27 88 94 10.1021/bi00401a015 3349046 Zietzer A. Jahnel A. L. Bulic M. Gutbrod K. Düsing P. Hosen M. R. Dörmann P. Werner N. Nickenig G. Jansen F. Activation of Neutral Sphingomyelinase 2 through Hyperglycemia Contributes to Endothelial Apoptosis Via Vesicle-Bound Intercellular Transfer of Ceramides Cell. Mol. Life Sci. 2022 79 48 10.1007/s00018-021-04049-5 PMC8739297 34951654 Rénert A.-F. Leprince P. Dieu M. Renaut J. Raes M. Bours V. Chapelle J.-P. Piette J. Merville M.-P. Fillet M. The Proapoptotic C16-Ceramide-Dependent Pathway Requires the Death-Promoting Factor Btf in Colon Adenocarcinoma Cells J. Proteome Res. 2009 8 4810 4822 10.1021/pr9005316 19705920 Lipsky N. G. Pagano R. E. Sphingolipid Metabolism in Cultured Fibroblasts: Microscopic and Biochemical Studies Employing a Fluorescent Ceramide Analogue Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 1983 80 2608 2612 10.1073/pnas.80.9.2608 6573674 PMC393876 Mesicek J. Lee H. Feldman T. Jiang X. Skobeleva A. Berdyshev E. V. Haimovitz-Friedman A. Fuks Z. Kolesnick R. Ceramide Synthases 2, 5, and 6 Confer Distinct Roles in Radiation-Induced Apoptosis in Hela Cells Cell. Signal. 2010 22 1300 1307 10.1016/j.cellsig.2010.04.006 20406683 PMC4348005 Futerman A. H. Hannun Y. A. The Complex Life of Simple Sphingolipids EMBO Rep. 2004 5 777 782 10.1038/sj.embor.7400208 15289826 PMC1299119 Armistead J. Höpfl S. Goldhausen P. Müller-Hartmann A. Fahle E. Hatzold J. Franzen R. Brodesser S. Radde N. E. Hammerschmidt M. A Sphingolipid Rheostat Controls Apoptosis Versus Apical Cell Extrusion as Alternative Tumour-Suppressive Mechanisms Cell Death Dis. 2024 15 746 10.1038/s41419-024-07134-2 39397024 PMC11471799 Tang H. Huang X. Pang S. Regulation of the Lysosome by Sphingolipids: Potential Role in Aging J. Biol. Chem. 2022 298 102118 10.1016/j.jbc.2022.102118 35691340 PMC9257404 Pagano R. E. Sepanski M. A. Martin O. C. Molecular Trapping of a Fluorescent Ceramide Analogue at the Golgi Apparatus of Fixed Cells: Interaction with Endogenous Lipids Provides a Trans-Golgi Marker for Both Light and Electron Microscopy J. Cell Biol. 1989 109 2067 2079 10.1083/jcb.109.5.2067 2478562 PMC2115850 Horbay R. Hamraghani A. Ermini L. Holcik S. Beug S. T. Yeganeh B. Role of Ceramides and Lysosomes in Extracellular Vesicle Biogenesis, Cargo Sorting and Release Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2022 23 15317 10.3390/ijms232315317 36499644 PMC9735581 Ventura A. E. Varela A. R. P. Dingjan T. Santos T. C. B. Fedorov A. Futerman A. H. Prieto M. Silva L. C. Lipid Domain Formation and Membrane Shaping by C24-Ceramide Biochim. Biophys. Acta Gen. Subj. 2020 1862 183400 10.1016/j.bbamem.2020.183400 32565121 Holopainen J. M. Angelova M. I. Kinnunen P. K. J. Vectorial Budding of Vesicles by Asymmetrical Enzymatic Formation of Ceramide in Giant Liposomes Biophys. J. 2000 78 830 838 10.1016/S0006-3495(00)76640-9 10653795 PMC1300685 Tuula A. N. Holopainen J. M. Hongxia Zhao a. Kinnunen P. K. J. Observation of Topical Catalysis by Sphingomyelinase Coupled to Microspheres J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2002 124 12129 12134 12371852 10.1021/ja017807r Li R. Blanchette-Mackie E. J. Ladisch S. Induction of Endocytic Vesicles by Exogenous C(6)-Ceramide J. Biol. Chem. 1999 274 21121 21127 10.1074/jbc.274.30.21121 10409665 Drescher D. Büchner T. Guttmann P. Werner S. Schneider G. Kneipp J. X-Ray Tomography Shows the Varying Three-Dimensional Morphology of Gold Nanoaggregates in the Cellular Ultrastructure Nanoscale Adv. 2019 1 2937 2945 10.1039/C9NA00198K 36133586 PMC9418343 Ruiz-Argüello M. B. Basáñez G. Goñi F. M. Alonso A. Different Effects of Enzyme-Generated Ceramides and Diacylglycerols in Phospholipid Membrane Fusion and Leakage J. Biol. Chem. 1996 271 26616 26621 10.1074/jbc.271.43.26616 8900135 Fernández-Pereira C. San Millán-Tejado B. Gallardo-Gómez M. Pérez-Márquez T. Alves-Villar M. Melcón-Crespo C. Fernández-Martín J. Ortolano S. Therapeutic Approaches in Lysosomal Storage Diseases Biomolecules 2021 11 1775 10.3390/biom11121775 34944420 PMC8698519 Lee P. Meisel D. Adsorption and Surface-Enhanced Raman of Dyes on Silver and Gold Sols J. Phys. Chem. 1982 86 3391 3395 10.1021/j100214a025 Lansmann , S. ; Bartelsen , O. ; Sandhoff , K. [16] Purification and Characterization of Recombinant Human Acid Sphingomyelinase Expressed in Insect Sf21 Cells . In Methods Enzymol ; Elsevier , 2000 ; Vol. 311 , pp 149 – 156 . 10563319 10.1016/s0076-6879(00)11075-4 Schneider G. Guttmann P. Heim S. Rehbein S. Mueller F. Nagashima K. Heymann J. B. Müller W. G. McNally J. G. Schneider G. Guttmann P. Heim S. Rehbein S. Mueller F. Nagashima K. Heymann J. B. Müller W. G. McNally J. G. Three-Dimensional Cellular Ultrastructure Resolved by X-Ray Microscopy Nat. Methods 2010 7 985 987 10.1038/nmeth.1533 21076419 PMC7337972 Eilers P. H. A Perfect Smoother Anal. Chem. 2003 75 3631 3636 10.1021/ac034173t 14570219 Team , R. C. R. A Language and Environment for Statistical Computing ; R Foundation for Statistical Computing : Vienna, Austria , 2022 ; p 2022 . Wright M. N. Ziegler A. Ranger: A Fast Implementation of Random Forests for High Dimensional Data in C++ and R J. Stat. Softw. 2017 77 5753 5771 10.18637/jss.v077.i01 Voges L. F. Jarren L. C. Seifert S. Exploitation of Surrogate Variables in Random Forests for Unbiased Analysis of Mutual Impact and Importance of Features Bioinformatics 2023 39 btad471 10.1093/bioinformatics/btad471 37522865 PMC10403431