Abstract Background Within an individual plant, different compartments (e.g. roots, leaves, fruits) host distinct communities of microorganisms due to variation in structural characteristics and resource availability. Grafting, which joins the root system of one individual with the shoot system of a second genetically distinct individual, has the potential to bring the microbial communities of different genotypes together. An important question is the extent to which unique root system and shoot system genotypes, when grafted together, influence the microbiota of the graft partner. Our study sought to answer this question by utilizing an experimental vineyard composed of ‘Chambourcin’ vines growing ungrafted and grafted to three different rootstocks, replicated across three irrigation treatments. We characterized bacterial and fungal communities in roots, leaves, and berries, as well as surrounding soil. Our objectives were to (1) characterize the microbiota of compartments within the root system (roots and adjacent soil) and the shoot system (leaves and berries), (2) determine the influence of rootstock genotypes, irrigation, and their interaction on the microbiota of aboveground and belowground compartments, and (3) investigate the distribution of microorganisms implicated in the late-season grapevine bunch rot disease sour rot ( Acetobacterales and Saccharomycetes ). Results Compartments were significantly differentiated in bacterial and fungal richness and composition. Abundance-based machine learning accurately predicted the compartment and differential abundance analysis showed a large portion of taxa differed significantly across compartments. Rootstock genotypes did not differ significantly in microbial community richness or composition; however, individual microbial taxa exhibited significant differences in abundance based on rootstock and irrigation treatment. The relative abundance of Acetobacterales and Saccharomycetes in the berry was influenced by complex interactions among rootstock genotype and irrigation. Conclusion Our results indicate that grapevine compartments retain distinct core microbiota regardless of the rootstock to which they are grafted. While rootstock genotype generally had a subtle impact on global patterns of microbial diversity, we found associations between rootstock genotypes and specific groups of microorganisms. Further experimental validation is needed in order to understand how associations with these microorganisms impacts a vine’s susceptibility to sour rot upon damage and whether the characteristics of wine are impacted.