Abstract Cognitive abilities are one of the major transdiagnostic domains in the National Institute of Mental Health’s Research Domain Criteria (RDoC). Following RDoC’s integrative approach, we aimed to develop brain-based predictive models for cognitive abilities that a) are developmentally stable over years during adolescence and b) account for the relationships between cognitive abilities and socio-demographic, psychological and genetic factors. For this, we leveraged the unique power of the large-scale, longitudinal data from the Adolescent Brain Cognitive Development (ABCD) study (n ∼11k) and combined MRI data across modalities (task-fMRI from three tasks, resting-state fMRI, structural MRI, DTI) using machine-learning. Our brain-based, predictive models for cognitive abilities were stable across two years during young adolescence and generalisable to different sites, partially predicting childhood cognition at around 20% of the variance. Moreover, our use of ‘opportunistic stacking’ allowed the model to handle missing values, reducing the exclusion from around 80% to around 5% of the data. We found fronto-parietal networks during a working-memory task to drive childhood-cognition prediction. The brain-based, predictive models significantly, albeit partially, accounted for variance in childhood cognition due to (1) key socio-demographic and psychological factors (proportion mediated=18.65% [17.29%-20.12%]) and (2) genetic variation, as reflected by the polygenic score of cognition (proportion mediated=15.6% [11%-20.7%]). Thus, our brain-based predictive models for cognitive abilities facilitate the development of a robust, transdiagnostic research tool for cognition at the neural level in keeping with the RDoC’s integrative framework. Key Points Using opportunistic stacking and multimodal MRI, we developed brain-based predictive models for children’s cognitive abilities that were longitudinally stable, generalisable to different sites and robust against missing data. Our brain-based models were able to partially mediate the relationships of childhood cognitive abilities with the socio-demographic, psychological and genetic factors. Our approach should pave the way for future researchers to employ multimodal MRI as a tool for the brain-based indicator of cognitive abilities, according to the integrative RDoC framework.