Abstract Metagenomics is a powerful method for interpreting the ecological roles and physiological capabilities of mixed microbial communities. Yet, many tools for processing metagenomic data are not designed to consider eukaryotes, nor are they built for an increasing amount of sequence data. EukHeist is an automated pipeline to retrieve eukaryotic and prokaryotic metagenome assembled genomes (MAGs) from large-scale metagenomic datasets. We developed the EukHeist workflow to specifically process large amounts of both metagenomic and/or metatranscriptomic sequence data in an automated and reproducible fashion. Here, we applied EukHeist to the large-size fraction data (0.8-2000 µm ) from Tara Oceans to recover both eukaryotic and prokaryotic MAGs, which we refer to as TOPAZ ( Tara Oceans Particle-Associated MAGs). The TOPAZ MAGs consisted of &gt;900 environmentally-relevant eukaryotic MAGs and &gt;4,000 bacterial and archaeal MAGs. The bacterial and archaeal TOPAZ MAGs expand the known marine phylogenetic diversity through the increase in coverage of likely particle- and host-associated taxa. We also demonstrate an approach to infer the putative functional mode of the recovered eukaryotic MAGs. A global survey of the TOPAZ MAGs enabled the identification of ecological cohorts, driven by specific environmental factors, and putative host-microbe associations. Importance Despite the ecological importance of single-celled eukaryotic organisms in marine environments, the majority are difficult to cultivate in the lab. Sequencing genetic material extracted from environmental samples enables researchers to document naturally-occurring protistan communities. However, conventional sequencing methodologies cannot separate out the genomes of individual organisms. To more completely capture the entire genomic content of mixed protistan community, we can create bins of sequences that represent the same organism. We developed a pipeline that enables scientists to bin individual organisms out of metagenomic reads, and show results that provide exciting insights into what protistan communities are present in the ocean and what roles they play in the ecosystem. Here, a global survey of both eukaryotic and prokaryotic MAGs enabled the identification of ecological cohorts, driven by specific environmental factors, and putative host-microbe associations. Accessible and scalable computational tools, such as EukHeist, are likely to accelerate the identification of meaningful genetic signatures from large datasets, ultimately expanding the eukaryotic tree of life.