Using fertilisers is indispensable for closing yield gaps in Sub Saharan Africa. Current fertiliser recommendations, however, are often blanket recommendations which do not take spatial variation in soil conditions within a region or country into account. Soil maps can potentially support fertiliser recommendations at a higher spatial resolution. The QUantitative Evaluation of the Fertility of Tropical Soils (QUEFTS) model is a decision support tool that predicts crop yields as an indicator of soil fertility and can be used to evaluate yield responses to fertilisers. It was designed for field level output and runs on field-specific soil information. The aim of this study was to compare two methods for developing maps of QUEFTS output, i.e. maize yield and the yield-limiting nutrient, with Rwanda as a case study. We used a database containing soil analysis results of 999 samples collected across Rwanda. Transfer functions were applied to predict the required P-Olsen and Exchangeable K input for QUEFTS based on the soil data. For the “Calculate-then-Interpolate” (CI) method, transfer functions and QUEFTS were applied to point data, and the final output was then interpolated using random forest modelling. For the “Interpolate-then-Calculate” (IC) method, maps of the soil parameters were developed first, before applying calculations. Implications of the chosen method (i.e. CI or IC) on QUEFTS predictions on a national scale were evaluated using set-aside locations. Results showed low precision and accuracy of QUEFTS maize yield predictions across Rwanda. The CI method performed better in predicting QUEFTS yield and yield-limiting nutrient than the IC method. Correlations between mapped yield predictions and predictions on set-aside evaluation locations were similar for the CI (r = 0.444) and IC (r = 0.439) methods. The poorer performance of the IC method was mostly due to overestimation of yields, which was most likely caused by the effect of smoothing on the soil maps used as input for QUEFTS. We conclude that the CI method is the preferred method for spatial application of QUEFTS.