In the Alpine environment, snow plays a key role in many processes involving ecosystems, biogeochemical cycles, and human wellbeing. Due to the inaccessibility of mountain areas and the high spatial and temporal heterogeneity of the snowpack, satellite spatio-temporal data without gaps offer a unique opportunity to monitor snow on a fine scale. In this study, we present a random forest approach within three different workflows to combine MODIS and Sentinel-2 snow products to retrieve daily gap-free snow cover maps at 20 m resolution. The three workflows differ in terms of the type of ingested snow products and, consequently, in the type of random forest used. The required inputs are the MODIS/Terra Snow Cover Daily L3 Global dataset at 500 m and the Sentinel-2 snow dataset at 20 m, automatically retrieved through the recently developed revised-Let It Snow workflow, from which the selected inputs are, alternatively, the Snow Cover Extent (SCE) map or the Normalized Difference Snow Index (NDSI) map, and a Digital Elevation Model (DEM) of consistent resolution with Sentinel-2 imagery. The algorithm is based on two steps, the first to fill the gaps of the MODIS snow dataset and the second to downscale the data and obtain the high resolution daily snow time series. The workflow is applied to a case study in Gran Paradiso National Park. The proposed study represents a first attempt to use the revised-Let It Snow with the purpose of extracting temporal parameters of snow. The validation was achieved by comparison with both an independent dataset of Sentinel-2 to assess the spatial accuracy, including the snowline elevation prediction, and the algorithm’s performance through the different topographic conditions, and with in-situ data collected by meteorological stations, to assess temporal accuracy, with a focus on seasonal snow phenology parameters. Results show that all of the approaches provide robust time series (overall accuracies of A1 = 93.4%, and A2 and A3 = 92.6% against Sentinel-2, and A1 = 93.1%, A2 = 93.7%, and A3 = 93.6% against weather stations), but the first approach requires about one fifth of the computational resources needed for the other two. The proposed workflow is fully automatic and requires input data that are readily and globally available, and promises to be easily reproducible in other study areas to obtain high-resolution daily time series, which is crucial for understanding snow-driven processes at a fine scale, such as vegetation dynamics after snowmelt.