Visible near-infrared (vis-NIR) spectroscopy has gained widespread recognition as an efficient and reliable approach for the rapid monitoring of soil properties. This technique relies on robust machine learning models that convert soil spectra information to soil properties. In particular, memory-based learning (MBL) has emerged as a powerful local modeling technique for soil spectral analysis. However, conventional MBL algorithms use linear models, disregarding the non-linear relationship between soil properties and vis-NIR spectra. Therefore, we hypothesize that non-linear memory-based learning (N-MBL) models can enhance prediction. This study develops and evaluates the N-MBL algorithm using the Lateritic Red soil spectral library (LRSSL) from Guangdong province in China. This library consists of 742 samples of vis-NIR spectra and corresponding soil properties, including pH, soil organic matter (SOM), total nitrogen (TN), total phosphorus (TP), and total potassium (TK). As a comparison, several commonly used supervised learning methods, such as Partial least squares regression (PLSR), Cubist, Random Forest (RF), Super vector machine (SVM), Convolution neural network (CNN), and local models (MBL), were compared to the proposed N-MBL. The results showed that local models generally outperformed supervised learning methods, particularly when applied to a large soil spectral library with a substantial number of samples (over 500). When comparing the two local models, MBL had more fluctuation of model performance compared to N-MBL as the number of selected nearest neighbors (k) varied between 30 and 250. As k increased, N-MBL showed higher R2 values for SOM and TN prediction than MBL but lower performance for pH and TK prediction. In addition, N-MBL outperformed MBL in predicting TP. In conclusion, N-MBL is a new local algorithm for predicting soil properties from vis-NIR spectra. It has a high potential to improve the accuracy of the prediction of multiple soil properties.