Abstract Cognitive abilities are often linked to mental health across various disorders, a pattern observed even in childhood. However, the extent to which this relationship is represented by different neurobiological units of analysis, such as multimodal neuroimaging and polygenic scores (PGS), remains unclear. Using large-scale data from the Adolescent Brain Cognitive Development (ABCD) Study, we first quantified the relationship between cognitive abilities and mental health by applying multivariate models to predict cognitive abilities from mental health in children aged 9-10, finding an out-of-sample r =.36. We then applied similar multivariate models to predict cognitive abilities from multimodal neuroimaging, polygenic scores (PGS) and environmental factors. Multimodal neuroimaging was based on 45 types of brain MRI (e.g., task fMRI contrasts, resting-state fMRI, structural MRI, and diffusion tensor imaging). Among these MRI types, the fMRI contrast, 2-Back vs. 0-Back, from the ENBack task provided the highest predictive performance ( r =.4). Combining information across all 45 types of brain MRI led to the predictive performance of r =.54. The PGS, based on previous genome-wide association studies on cognitive abilities, achieved a predictive performance of r =.25. Environmental factors, including socio-demographics (e.g., parent’s income and education), lifestyles (e.g., extracurricular activities, sleep) and developmental adverse events (e.g., parental use of alcohol/tobacco, pregnancy complications), led to a predictive performance of r =.49. In a series of separate commonality analyses, we found that the relationship between cognitive abilities and mental health was primarily represented by multimodal neuroimaging (66%) and, to a lesser extent, by PGS (21%). Additionally, environmental factors accounted for 63% of the variance in the relationship between cognitive abilities and mental health. The multimodal neuroimaging and PGS then explained 58% and 21% of the variance due to environmental factors, respectively. Notably, these patterns remained stable over two years. Our findings underscore the significance of neurobiological units of analysis for cognitive abilities, as measured by multimodal neuroimaging and PGS, in understanding both a) the relationship between cognitive abilities and mental health and b) the variance in this relationship shared with environmental factors.