Abstract Context There is great interest in land management practices for pollinators; however, a quantitative comparison of landscape and local effects on bee communities is necessary to determine if adding small habitat patches can increase bee abundance or species richness. The value of increasing floral abundance at a site is undoubtedly influenced by the phenology and magnitude of floral resources in the landscape, but due to the complexity of measuring landscape-scale resources, these factors have been understudied. Objectives To address this knowledge gap, we quantified the relative importance of local versus landscape scale resources for bee communities, identified the most important metrics of local and landscape quality, and evaluated how these relationships vary with season. Methods We studied season-specific relationships between local and landscape quality and wild-bee communities at 33 sites in the Finger Lakes region of New York, USA. We paired site surveys of wild bees, plants, and soil characteristics with a multi-dimensional assessment of landscape composition, configuration, insecticide toxic load, and a spatio-temporal evaluation of floral resources at local and landscape scales. Results We found that the most relevant spatial scale and landscape factor varied by season. Early-season bee communities responded primarily to landscape resources, including the presence of flowering trees and wetland habitats. In contrast, mid to late-season bee communities were more influenced by local conditions, though bee diversity was negatively impacted when sites were embedded in highly agricultural landscapes. Soil composition had complex impacts on bee communities, and likely reflects effects on plant community flowering. Conclusions Early-season bees can be supported by adding flowering trees and wetlands, while mid to late-season bees can be supported by local addition of summer and fall flowering plants. Sites embedded in landscapes with a greater proportion of natural areas will host a greater bee species diversity.