• Maximum value selection in certain areas is effective for preprocessing. • SOC map did not work as the covariate in whole area but low-site-density areas. • Soil thickness linked to the tephra distribution and the microtopography. Soil thickness is a crucial parameter for local, regional and globalscale assessments, including those related to carbon cycles, water retention capacity, and landslide risk in the context of biogeochemical, soil physical, and slope stability models. This study had two primary objectives: 1) to predict maps depicting the probability of the A-horizon thickness exceeding 15 cm (AT15) and the A and B-horizon thickness exceeding 75 cm (soil thickness, ST75), across the expansive mountainous regions of Japan. 2) To evaluate the enhancement of model performance through the preselection of the maximum value and implementation of enhanced modeling using gridded modern soil survey data to utilize geographically clustered data. Initially, the study modeled the SOC, bulk density, and coarse fraction proportion using data from a modern soil survey of 0–30 cm. Subsequently, we employed a random forest model for AT15 and ST75 using a dataset of geographically clustered legacy soil profiles as training data, and topographic, vegetation, climatic, and volcanic attributes, and the predicted soil organic carbon and related properties as explanatory variables. We reduced the number of legacy soil profiles in the densely sampled areas by selecting the maximum soil thickness before modeling. The study assessed the final model performance at the national scale, with the accuracy and F1 scores reaching 0.691 and 0.754 for AT15 and 0.600 and 0.511 for ST75, respectively. Maximum value selection proved effective for modeling ST75 but not AT15. Although an enhanced model incorporating data from legacy and modern surveys did not improve accuracy at the national level, it did improve recall in sparsely sampled areas, for ST75. The resulting spatial pattern of the predicted ST75 effectively captured variations in soil thickness associated with topography, geology, and tephra deposition. However, ST75, representing pedological soil thickness, tended to be strongly underestimated compared to geotechnical soil thickness, including the C-horizon, especially in areas affected by tephra deposition. This study represents a significant contribution as it delivers Japan's first national-scale soil thickness map and an approach for utilizing clustered legacy data. It is expected to find practical applications in estimating water storage capacity for forest management and other relevant purposes.