Abstract Each year, millions of birds migrate nocturnally over the North Sea basin, an area designated for significant offshore wind energy development. Wind turbines can harm aerial wildlife through collisions and barrier effects, especially when birds fly at low altitudes below the wind turbine rotor tip. We aim to quantify seasonal and nightly differences in flight altitudes of nocturnal bird migration over the North Sea and identify how weather influences low‐altitude flight to inform wind turbine curtailment procedures for reducing bird fatalities. We used bird tracking radars at Borssele and Luchterduinen offshore wind parks, 22 and 23 km from the western Dutch coast, to monitor altitude distributions during migration. We show that median flight altitude was higher in spring compared to autumn at Borssele (spring: 285.5 m, autumn: 169.2 m; p &lt; .001, effect size [ES] = 0.0001) and Luchterduinen (spring: 133.8 m, autumn: 126.0 m; p &lt; .001, ES = 0.002) and below wind turbine rotor tip in both seasons. On most nights in both seasons, the majority of migrants flew predominantly at low altitudes, except for intense migration nights in spring in Borssele where, on 87% of these nights, migration mainly occurred at high altitudes. The most important predictors of low‐altitude migration in both seasons were day of year and wind assistance. Birds chose altitudes with the most favorable wind conditions for migration in both seasons. The relationship between day of year and low‐altitude migration fraction suggests that different species migrate at different altitudes. In spring, birds were flying lower at the beginning and the end of the night, reflecting departures and arrivals of birds, while radar location in autumn was a good predictor of low‐altitude flights, indicating that different local migratory axes have distinct altitude distributions. Our findings suggest that mitigation measures offshore may be more effective during autumn than spring, especially on nights with more supportive wind conditions at altitudes below 300 m.