Abstract Fluorinated compounds are used for agrochemical, pharmaceutical, and numerous industrial applications, resulting in global contamination. In many molecules, fluorine is incorporated to enhance the half-life and improve bioavailability. Fluorinated compounds enter the human body through food, water, and xenobiotics including pharmaceuticals, exposing gut microbes to these substances. The human gut microbiota is known for its xenobiotic biotransformation capabilities, but it was not previously known whether gut microbial enzymes could break carbon-fluorine bonds, potentially altering the toxicity of these compounds. Here, through the development of a rapid, miniaturized fluoride detection assay for whole-cell screening, we discovered active gut microbial defluorinases. We biochemically characterized enzymes from diverse human gut microbial classes including Clostridia, Bacilli, and Coriobacteriia, with the capacity to hydrolyze (di)fluorinated organic acids and a fluorinated amino acid. Whole-protein alanine scanning, molecular dynamics simulations, and chimeric protein design enabled the identification of a disordered C-terminal protein segment involved in defluorination activity. Domain swapping exclusively of the C-terminus conferred defluorination activity to a non-defluorinating dehalogenase. To advance our understanding of the structural and sequence differences between defluorinating and non-defluorinating dehalogenases, we trained machine learning models which identified protein termini as important features. Models trained on 41-amino acid segments from protein C-termini alone predicted defluorination activity with 83% accuracy (compared to 95% accuracy based on full-length protein features). This work is relevant for therapeutic interventions and environmental and human health by uncovering specificity-determining signatures of fluorine biochemistry from the gut microbiome. Significance Humans have introduced carbon-fluorine bonds into numerous manufactured compounds, including pharmaceuticals, leading to the formation of toxic fluorinated byproducts. While the human gut microbiota is known for its ability to metabolize drugs, its encoded capacity to break the strong carbon-fluorine chemical bond was previously unknown. Here we discovered that human gut microbial enzymes are capable of cleaving carbon-fluorine bonds. We developed a 96-well colorimetric fluoride assay amenable to bacterial culture-based screening. We additionally conducted whole-protein alanine scanning mutagenesis and identified through machine learning that flexible C-terminal loop residues were predictive of defluorination. Taken in the context of flexible regions of other enzyme families known to perform fluorine chemistry, this work supports using convergent structural features to predict defluorination specificity.