Grasslands are one of the most abundant and biodiverse ecosystems in the world. However, in southern European countries, the abandonment of traditional management activities, such as extensive grazing, has caused many semi-natural grasslands to be invaded by shrubs. Therefore, there is a need to characterize semi-natural grasslands to determine their aboveground primary production and livestock-carrying capacity. Nevertheless, current methods lack a realistic identification of vegetation assemblages where grassland biophysical parameters can be accurately retrieved by the inversion of turbid-medium radiative transfer models (RTMs) in fine-grained landscapes. To this end, in this study we proposed a novel framework in which multiple endmember spectral mixture analysis (MESMA) was implemented to realistically identify grassland-dominated pixels from Sentinel-2 imagery in heterogeneous mountain landscapes. Then, the inversion of PROSAIL RTM (coupled PROSPECT and SAIL leaf and canopy models) was implemented separately for retrieving grassland biophysical parameters, including the leaf area index (LAI), fractional vegetation cover (FCOVER), and aboveground biomass (AGB), from grassland-dominated Sentinel-2 pixels while accounting for non-vegetated areas at the subpixel level. The study region was the southern slope of the Cantabrian Mountains (Spain), with a high spatial variability of fine-grained land covers. The MESMA grassland fraction image had a high accuracy based on validation results using centimetric resolution aerial orthophotographs (R2 = 0.74, and RMSE = 0.18). The validation with field reference data from several mountain passes of the southern slope of the Cantabrian Mountains featured a high accuracy for LAI (R2 = 0.74, and RMSE = 0.56 m2·m−2), FCOVER (R2 = 0.78 and RMSE = 0.07), and AGB (R2 = 0.67, and RMSE = 43.44 g·m−2). This study provides a reliable method to accurately identify and estimate grassland biophysical variables in highly diverse landscapes at a regional scale, with important implications for the management and conservation of threatened semi-natural grasslands. Future studies should investigate the PROSAIL inversion over the endmember signatures and subpixel fractions depicted by MESMA to adequately address the parametrization of the underlying background reflectance by using prior information and should also explore the scalability of this approach to other heterogeneous landscapes.