, separated by 30 min of rest. BDNF was analysed in blood samples from the brachial artery, internal jugular vein, femoral vein and antecubital vein. Brain/skeletal muscle exchange of BDNF, calculated as arterial-venous differences in BDNF multiplied by blood flow in the middle cerebral artery/common femoral artery, was measured simultaneously with blood sampling. Exercise intensity-dependent increases were observed in blood platelet count, forearm venous serum mBDNF and plasma proBDNF, but not in forearm venous plasma mBDNF. Brain release (or uptake) was not detected for either plasma mBDNF, serum mBDNF or plasma proBDNF. However, muscle uptake of plasma mBDNF and release of plasma proBDNF were observed after high-intensity exercise. Our findings demonstrate that exercise-dependent increases in serum mBDNF are not derived from the brain or the exercised skeletal muscle. Rather, the source of the increase appears to be the increase in platelets that are enriched with mBDNF. Furthermore, in physically fit adults, BDNF is not released from the brain into the bloodstream, after exercise, regardless of exercise intensity. Finally, changes in plasma proBDNF after exercise appear to be dependent on exercised skeletal muscle rather than brain release. KEY POINTS: Previously shown exercise-induced increases in forearm venous brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) are often assumed to be indicative of release from the brain. We investigated whether exercise-induced changes in forearm venous mature BDNF (mBDNF) and precursor proBDNF are paralleled by concomitant changes in BDNF exchange over the brain and skeletal muscle. We observed exercise intensity-dependent increases in platelet count, forearm venous serum mBDNF and plasma proBDNF, but not in forearm venous plasma mBDNF. We found muscle uptake of plasma mBDNF and release of plasma proBDNF after high-intensity exercise but no exercise intensity-dependent brain exchange of either plasma mBDNF, serum mBDNF or plasma proBDNF. Our findings suggest that acute exercise-induced increases in circulating serum mBDNF may be solely a result of increased platelet count, probably due to splenic platelet release; and that exercised skeletal muscle, and not the brain, responds to high-intensity exercise by releasing plasma proBDNF.