Abstract Background Following a century of fire suppression in western North America, managers use forest restoration treatments to reduce fuel loads and reintroduce key processes like fire. However, annual area burned by wildfire frequently outpaces the application of restoration treatments. As this trend continues under climate change, it is essential that we understand the effects of contemporary wildfires on forest ecosystems and the extent to which post-fire structures are meeting common forest restoration objectives. In this study, we used airborne lidar to evaluate fire effects across yellow pine and mixed conifer (YPMC) forests of California’s Sierra Nevada. We quantified the degree to which forest structures in first-entry burned areas (previously unburned since ~ 1900s) and unburned controls aligned with restoration targets derived from contemporary reference sites. We also identified environmental conditions that contributed to more restorative fire effects. Results Relative to unburned controls, structural patterns in first-entry burned areas aligned more closely with reference sites. Yet, across all burn severities, first-entry wildfires were only moderately successful at meeting targets for canopy cover (48% total area) and ladder fuels (54% total area), and achieving these targets while also producing tree clump and opening patterns aligning with reference sites was less common (16% total area). Moderate-severity patches had the highest proportion of restorative fire effects (55–64% total area), while low- and high-severity patches were either too dense or too open, respectively. Our models (and publicly-available mapped predictions) indicated a higher probability of restorative effects within 1 km of previous fires, within the mid-upper climate range of the YPMC zone, and under moderate fire intensities (~ 1–2 m flame lengths). Conclusions First-entry wildfires can sometimes restore structural conditions by reducing canopy cover and ladder fuels and increasing structural heterogeneity, especially within moderate-severity patches. However, these initial fires represent just one step toward restoring dry forest ecosystems. Post-fire landscapes will require additional low- to moderate-intensity fires and/or strategic management interventions to fully restore structural conditions. In yet unburned forests, managers could prioritize mechanical treatments at lower elevations, early-season burning at mid to high elevations, and resource objective wildfires in landscapes with mosaics of past wildfires.