Forest productivity is one of the most important aspects of forest management, landscape planning, and climate change assessment. However, although there are multiple elements known to affect productivity, most of them rely on the “nature” of the edaphic, climatic, and geographic conditions, and only some specific aspects can be modified through forest management or “nurture”. Through evaluation of site resource availability and an understanding of the main drivers of productivity, management can present solutions to overcome site resource limitations to productivity. Therefore, understanding the implications of a specific management regime requires understanding what drives productivity across large spatial extents and among different management regimes. In this study, we used data from over 1 million hectares of industrial forestland, covering over 6000 different soils and several management regimes of Pinus taeda L. plantations, as well as plot-based data from the Forest Inventory and Analysis (FIA) program, facilitating a comparison of planted and natural Pinus taeda stands. Combined with US Geological Survey LiDAR data, we computed site index and generated wall-to-wall productivity maps for planted Pinus taeda stands in the southeastern US, as well as point-based site index estimates for the FIA dataset. We modeled site index using a random forest algorithm considering edaphic, geologic, and physiographic province information based on the Forest Productivity Cooperative “SPOT” system, and also included climate and management history data. Our model predicted site index with an R 2 of 0.701 and RMSE of 1.41 m on the industrial data and R 2 of 0.417 and RMSE of 1.84 m for the FIA data. We found that year of establishment of the forest, physiographic province, and geology, were the most important drivers of site index. The soil classification modifier indicating root restrictions were the most important soil-specific variable. Additionally, we found an average increase in site index of 3.05 m since the 1950s for all FIA data, and an average increase of 4.73 m for all industrial data since the 1970s. For the latest period analyzed (2000–2012), average site index in planted FIA plots was 1.2 m higher than naturally regenerated FIA plots, and site index in all industrial forestland had a site index almost 3 m greater than planted FIA plots. Overall, we believe this work sets the foundation for better understanding of forest productivity and highlights the importance of intensive silviculture to improve productivity, and as an additional tool to achieve the economic, environmental, and social objectives. • Productivity in intensive/extensive management was compared with LiDAR/NFI data. • Management and environment explained 70 % and 40 % of variance in each data source. • Variable importance and interaction were comparable among data sources. • Management level and age of plantation had a non-negligible effect on site index. • Site index increased 5 m in industrial data and 3 m in NFI data since the 1970s.