Abstract Cognitive abilities are often associated with mental health across different disorders, beginning in childhood. However, the extent to which the relationship between cognitive abilities and mental health is represented in part by different neurobiological units of analysis, such as multimodal neuroimaging and polygenic scores (PGS), remains unclear. Using large-scale data from the Adolescent Brain Cognitive Development (ABCD) Study, we first quantified the relationship between cognitive abilities and mental health in children aged 9-10. Our multivariate models revealed that mental health variables could predict cognitive abilities with an out-of-sample correlation of approximately .4. In a series of separate commonality analyses, we found that this relationship between cognitive abilities and mental health was primarily represented by multimodal neuroimaging (66%) and, to a lesser extent, by polygenic scores (PGS) (21%). This multimodal neuroimaging was based on multivariate models predicting cognitive abilities from 45 types of brain MRI (such as, task fMRI contrasts, resting-state fMRI, structural MRI, and diffusion tensor imaging), while the PGS was based on previous genome-wide association studies on cognitive abilities. Additionally, we also found that environmental factors accounted for 63% of the variance in the relationship between cognitive abilities and mental health. These environmental factors included socio-demographics (e.g., parent’s income and education), lifestyles (e.g., extracurricular activities, sleep) and developmental adverse events (e.g., parental use of alcohol/tobacco, pregnancy complications). The multimodal neuroimaging and PGS then explained 58% and 21% of the variance due to environmental factors, respectively. Notably, these patterns remained stable over two years. Accordingly, our findings underscore the significance of neurobiological units of analysis for cognitive abilities, as measured by multimodal neuroimaging and PGS, in understanding a) the relationship between cognitive abilities and mental health and b) the variance in this relationship that was shared with environmental factors.