Large outbreaks of Shigella sonnei among children in Haredi Jewish (ultra-Orthodox) communities in Brooklyn, New York have occurred every 3–5 years since at least the mid-1980s. These outbreaks are partially attributable to large numbers of young children in these communities, with transmission highest in child care and school settings, and secondary transmission within households. As these outbreaks have been prolonged and difficult to control, we developed an agent-based model of shigellosis transmission among children in these communities to support New York City Department of Health and Mental Hygiene staff. Simulated children were assigned an initial susceptible, infectious, or recovered (immune) status and interacted and moved between their home, child care program or school, and a community site. We calibrated the model according to observed case counts as reported to the Health Department. Our goal was to better understand the efficacy of existing interventions and whether limited outreach resources could be focused more effectively. We evaluated how well disseminating hand washing education in child care programs can reduce the number of infected children. The model indicated that intervention efficacy may be as high as 24% when all intervention parameters are at optimal values but only approximately 7% for a more realistic, less stringent scenario. We ranked intervention parameters according to their permutation importance using a random-forest regression analysis. The most important parameter was the minimum number of reported cases in a child care program that triggers a visit to disseminate hand washing education, followed by the use of non-antibacterial soap in hand washing education, the number of additional visits to child care programs, and the probability of successfully obtaining information on child care program attendance via patient interview. Additional strategies should be considered, such as working with community partners to assist with hand hygiene education at facilities during an outbreak.