Abstract Global warming poses a major threat to forests and events of increased tree mortality are observed globally. Studying tree mortality often relies on local-level observations of dieback while large-scale analyses are lacking. Satellite remote sensing provides the spatial coverage and sufficiently high temporal and spatial resolution needed to investigate tree mortality at landscape-scale. However, adequate reference data for training satellite-based models are scarce. In this study, we employed the first maps of standing deadwood in Germany for the years 2018–2022 with 10 m spatial resolution that were created by using tree mortality observations spotted in hundreds of drone images as the reference. We use these maps to study spatial and temporal patterns of tree mortality in Germany and analyse their biotic and abiotic environmental drivers using random forest regression. In 2019, the second consecutive hotter drought year in a row, standing deadwood increased steeply to 334 ± 189 kilohectar (kha) which corresponds to 2.5 ± 1.4% of the total forested area in Germany. Picea abies, Pinus sylvestris, and Fagus sylvatica showed highest shares of standing deadwood. During 2018–2021 978 ± 529 kha (7.9 ± 4.4%) of standing dead trees accumulated. The higher mortality estimates that we report compared to other surveys (such as the ground-based forest condition survey) can be partially attributed to the fact that remote sensing captures mortality from a bird’s eye perspective and that the high spatial detail (10 m) in this study also captures scattered occurrences of tree mortality. Atmospheric drought (i.e. climatic water balance and vapor pressure deficit) and temperature extremes (i.e. number of hot days and frosts after vegetation onset) were the most important predictors of tree mortality. We found increased tree mortality for smaller and younger stands and on less productive sites. Monospecific stands were generally not more affected by mortality than average, but only when interactions with damaging insects (e.g. bark beetles) occurred. Because excess tree mortality rates threaten many forests across the globe, similar analyses of tree mortality are warranted and technically feasible at the global scale. We encourage the international scientific community to share and compile local data on deadwood occurrences (see example: www.deadtrees.earth) as such a collaborative effort is required to help understand mortality events on a global scale.