The nitrogen cycle is significantly altered by agricultural activities such as animal husbandry and fertilization, which can turn the landscape from a natural sink of ammonia (NH 3 ) to a net source. Ammonia fluxes at broader spatiotemporal scales have been well studied, however, smaller-scale, point source studies are needed to quantify atmosphere-biosphere nitrogen balances around individual agricultural sources such as extensively managed production grassland. The aim of this study was to quantify the spatiotemporal variation in NH 3 fluxes on dairy farm production grassland ( Lolium perenne L.) throughout a full year. We focused on the dairy stable as a point emission source, as well as on the management practices (such as slurry application) performed by farmers. The temporal variation in NH 3 fluxes was assessed using novel automated dynamic flux chambers adapted for NH 3 . Manual flux chambers were deployed to determine spatial variation. While fluxes did vary spatially, we found significant losses of NH 3 (99.6 %) during the growing and harvesting season (March to September). This was largely attributed to substantial emission rates directly after slurry application while net emission/deposition was close to zero during late-fall and winter. Overall, the net annual NH 3 -N emission of this production grassland was 12 kg ha −1 y −1 . Post slurry application emissions were especially high during warm and dry weather conditions. Optimizing the timing of fertilization application according to local weather conditions can therefore serve as a management practice to limit NH 3 emission, benefitting both farmers and the natural environment. • Flux chambers revealed spatiotemporal fluxes of ammonia at a dairy farm. • Net winter-time flux of production grassland was close to 0 kg NH 3 -N ha −1 mo −1. • Year-round net emission was strongly influenced by individual fertilization events. • Net annual emission of dairy farm production grassland was 12 kg NH 3 -N ha −1 y −1.