Marine Animal Forests (MAFs), among the largest biomes on Earth, represent ecologically and economically important ecosystems. Their structural complexity, engineered by sessile organisms, supports high biodiversity and multiple ecosystem services. Despite growing restoration efforts, MAFs remain excluded from biodiversity credit markets due to the absence of standardized, ecosystem-specific metrics for quantifying ecological gains. Here we introduce the Sessile Transplants Biodiversity Index (STBI), an applied framework for quantifying biodiversity gains associated with restoration interventions to support biodiversity crediting in MAFs. The STBI integrates key ecological and restoration parameters, such as species richness and diversity, abundance, genotypic diversity, colony size, and spatial extent, into a transparent and modular index. Initially developed for coral reefs but adaptable to other MAF benthic habitats, the index requires an explicit ecological baseline for one biodiversity credit, ensuring proportional crediting across projects and contexts. We demonstrate that the STBI captures biodiversity dimensions often overlooked by conventional diversity indices and converts them into biodiversity credits. Through simulations of synthetic communities and two empirical case studies, we show that the STBI framework rewards restoration designs that promote balanced species representation, genetic variability, and habitat complexity. By offering a standardized and scalable framework, the STBI links ecological recovery and its associated ecosystem service potential under global change to measurable outcomes. This represents one of the first operational tools directly connecting measurable MAF biodiversity gains in restoration and conservation programs to emerging nature markets. The STBI may complement existing biodiversity crediting initiatives by providing a standardized, auditable, and scalable index tailored to sessile marine ecosystems that aligns with the Kunming–Montreal Global Biodiversity Framework.