ABSTRACT Aim Elucidating the mechanisms shaping parasite diversity patterns is critical because parasites encompass about 40% of known species, and are crucial for ecosystem structure and function. In free-living species, diversity patterns in the Anthropocene are shaped by niche-breadth because specialists (narrow niche-breadth taxa) are more sensitive to environmental disturbance compared to generalists (broad niche-breadth taxa). Like free-living species, parasites too can be categorized as specialists or generalists according to their niche-breadth (i.e., diversity of hosts they can infect). However, unlike free-living species, the effects of niche-breadth on parasite diversity patterns remain unclear. Here, we used haemosporidian parasites as a model system to identify factors affecting parasite diversity patterns, and test if these patterns differ between specialist ( Haemoproteus ) and generalist ( Plasmodium ) parasites. Location Southern India Taxon Haemoproteus spp. and Plasmodium spp. (Haemosporida) Methods Blood samples from wild birds were screened using molecular tools to identify haemosporidian parasite lineages. Statistical analyses, including random forest models and generalized dissimilarity models, were utilized to evaluate how environmental and host factors drive spatial patterns of parasite α and β diversity. Results Our results reveal that phylogenetic diversity is primarily shaped by host-related variables in the specialist parasites, but by numerous host- and environment-related factors in the generalists. In keeping with ecological theory, the specialist parasites showed higher α diversity and lower evenness compared to the generalists. Additionally, while β diversity of the specialist parasites was primarily driven by spatial differences in richness (e.g., taxon nestedness) rather than replacement (e.g., taxon turnover), the opposite pattern was found in the generalist. Main conclusion The differential patterns and drivers of diversity in specialist vs. generalist parasites demonstrates why specialists parasites are good indicators of ecosystem health and elucidates the mechanism by which anthropogenic disturbance increases the risk of emerging infectious diseases which are primarily caused by generalist parasites.